Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Environment International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envint

Review article

Synergy between quantitative microbial source tracking (qMST) and
quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA): A review and prospectus

T

Qian Zhanga,1, Javier Gallardb, Baolei Wuc, Valerie J. Harwoodb, Michael J. Sadowskya,d,
⁎
Kerry A. Hamiltone,f, Warish Ahmedg, ,1
a

BioTechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, 1479 Gortner Ave, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
Department of Integrative Biology, SCA 110, University of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Ave, Tampa, FL 33620, USA
c
School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, No. 13 Yanta Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710055, PR China
d
Department of Soil, Water & Climate and Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, 1991 Upper Buford Ave, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
e
School for Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment, Arizona State University, 660 S College Ave, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
f
The Biodesign Institute Center for Environmental Health Engineering, Arizona State University, 1001 S McAllister Ave, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
g
CSIRO Land and Water, Ecosciences Precinct, 41 Boggo Road, QLD 4102, Australia
b

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Frederic Coulon

The use of microbial source tracking (MST) marker genes has grown in recent years due to the need to attribute
point and non-point fecal contamination to specific sources. Quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) is a
modeling approach used to estimate health risks from exposure to feces-contaminated water and associated
pathogens. A combination of these approaches [quantitative MST (qMST) and QMRA] can provide additional
pathogen-related information for prioritizing and addressing health risks, compared to reliance on conventional
fecal indicator bacteria (FIB). To inform expansion of this approach, a review of published qMST-QMRA studies
was conducted to summarize the state of the science and to identify research needs. The reviewed studies
primarily aimed to identify what levels of MST marker genes in hypothetical recreational waterbodies would
exceed the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) risk benchmarks for primary contact recreators. The QMRA models calculated relationships between MST marker gene(s) and reference pathogens
based on published data in the literature. The development of a robust, accurate relationship was identified as an
urgent research gap for qMST-QMRA. This metric requires additional knowledge to quantify the relationship
between MST marker genes and the degree of variability in decay of pathogens as a dynamic function of environmental conditions and combinations of fecal sources at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Improved
characterization of host shedding rates of host-associated microorganisms (i.e., MST marker genes), as well as
fate and transport of these microorganisms and their nucleic acids, would facilitate expansion of this approach to
other exposure pathways. Incorporation of information regarding the recovery efficiency, and host-specificity of
MST marker genes into QMRA model parameters, and the sensitivity analysis, would greatly improve risk
management and site-specific water monitoring criteria.

Keywords:
Microbial source tracking
QMRA
Marker genes
Sewage contamination
Health risks

1. Introduction
Safe and clean water resources protect human health and drive
economic growth. Waterborne illnesses have historically been a significant threat to human health and still remain a challenge, particularly when pathways are not understood. For example, in the United
States alone, 885 waterborne disease outbreaks were reported in association with drinking water between 1971 and 2012 (Beer et al., 2015),
and 879 outbreaks were associated with recreational waters from 1978

to 2012 (Hlavsa et al., 2015). To minimize human health risks, it would
be ideal to screen water for disease-causing microorganisms, such as
pathogenic bacteria, protozoa, and viruses. However, since there are
many different types of pathogens present in a contaminated water
source at any given time, it is impractical, time-consuming, and cost
prohibitive to screen water samples for all potential pathogens. Consequently, fecal indicators, and more recently microbial source tracking
(MST) marker genes are preferred over testing only a handful of pathogens to reduce false negatives when addressing waterborne

Corresponding author at: Ecosciences Precinct, 41 Boggo Road, Dutton Park, 4102, Queensland, Australia.
E-mail address: Warish.Ahmed@csiro.au (W. Ahmed).
1
Contributed equally to this manuscript.
⁎

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.051
Received 24 February 2019; Received in revised form 21 March 2019; Accepted 21 March 2019
Available online 08 July 2019
0160-4120/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

pathogen presence (Harwood et al., 2014; Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010).
Fecal indicator bacteria (FIB), such as Escherichia coli (E. coli),
Enterococcus spp. (enterococci), spores of Clostridium perfringens, and
bacteriophage to coliforms (coliphages) have been used to infer fecal
presence, and therefore, potential pathogens in waters (Ashbolt et al.,
2001; Nappier et al., 2019). The benefits of FIB as a proxy for pathogens
are: (1) they are easy to culture; (2) can be enumerated easily; (3) inexpensive to assay; (4) mostly non-pathogenic; and (5) their abundance
is generally greater in human and animal feces compared to pathogens
(Bonde, 1966; Campos et al., 2015; Carbal, 2010; Nappier et al., 2019).
Despite the benefits of measuring FIB instead of pathogens, their application in monitoring of water quality has been criticized as compared
to enteric pathogens. FIB can out-persist pathogens but persistence
differs with fecal source (Korajkic et al., 2019), and they grow in various environments, such as soils, sands, sediments, and aquatic vegetation (Anderson et al., 2005; Badgley et al., 2011; Byappanahalli &
Fujioka, 1998; Ishii & Sadowsky, 2008; Ishii et al., 2006; Solo-Gabriele
et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2015). Stated quite simply, if FIB proliferate in
the absence of fecal inputs, then they cannot be considered as suitable
proxies for fecal contamination and possible pathogen presence. As
such it is no surprise that many studies have reported poor correlations
between FIB and pathogens in sewage, recreational water, drinking
water reservoirs, stormwater, and groundwater (Ahmed et al., 2010;
Ferguson et al., 2012; Harwood et al., 2005; Signor et al., 2005). Most
importantly, monitoring for FIB does not provide information on the
contaminating sources, and without knowing the sources, relative pathogen contributions and risks differ (Soller et al., 2015), making best
management practices (BMPs) and remediation efforts difficult or not
feasible.
Microbial source tracking is a water quality management tool that
identifies contaminating fecal input sources. Over the past several
decades, MST tools have been developed for a range of targets and
applied to a variety of waterbodies (Bernhard & Field, 2000; Hagedorn
et al., 1999; Harwood et al., 2009a; Harwood et al., 2009b; Nguyen
et al., 2018; Steele et al., 2018; Wiggins, 1996). MST tools have been
validated to identify fecal input sources from human (Green et al.,
2014a), cattle (Shanks et al., 2008), pig (Mieszkin et al., 2009), dog
(Green et al., 2014b), chicken (Weidhaas et al., 2010), seagull (Lee
et al., 2013), possum (Devane et al., 2013), and other animals by using
quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of host-associated marker genes. A
large number of laboratory and field studies show that analyses of
marker gene(s) can be used to identify sources of fecal contamination in
environmental water samples with a high degree of accuracy and precision (Boehm et al., 2013; Shanks et al., 2012).
The application of MST tools has enhanced our capabilities in protecting watersheds and allowed for the implementation of total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) and BMPs (Benham et al., 2011; USEPA,
2001). The degree of human health risk associated with contaminating
fecal sources will vary because the concentration and types of pathogens can vary from source to source (Soller et al., 2014). The abundance
of marker genes will also vary by input source. For example, the concentration of Bacteroides HF183 marker gene is one- to two-orders of
magnitude greater in untreated sewage compared to viral marker genes
(in the context of MST) or viruses such as human adenovirus (HAdV) or
human polyomavirus (HPyV) (Hughes et al., 2017). Therefore, a link
between contaminating sources [i.e., quantitative MST (qMST) data]
and human health risks need to be validated beyond what in theory
looks promising (Boehm et al., 2015). This information is paramount
for regulators to put qMST results in the context of human health risk
and facilitate subsequent mitigation strategies.
Quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) is a tool that uses
dose-response (DR) models for specific (reference) pathogens and assessment for different exposure scenarios to estimate the human health
risks (Haas & Gerba, 2014). QMRA consists of four interconnected
steps: (1) hazard identification; (2) exposure assessment; (3) dose-response (DR) assessment; and (4) risk characterization (Haas et al.,

2014). The process primarily involves determining the concentration of
reference pathogen(s) at the point(s) of environment exposure, typically by estimating in source(s) and modeling pathogen fate and
transport to point(s) of human exposure; then combined with ingestion
volume to estimate the dose. The calculated dose is used in conjunction
with a corresponding DR model for each exposure pathway/pathogen
combination to generate health risks estimates (Schoen et al., 2011).
Although QMRA is widely implemented to support water safety plans
and the decision-making process (Petterson & Ashbolt, 2016a), there is
inherent variability in microbial processes as well as uncertainties in
pathogen estimates and model assumptions associated with the estimation of risk (Petterson & Ashbolt, 2016b; Petterson et al., 2015b).
Some of these uncertainties are large, and typically conservative assumptions are used first to see if further information/reduction in uncertainties are necessary to address the purpose of the QMRA (Medema
et al., 2006). Consequently, results need to be interpreted in light of the
certainty of the input assumptions and the health risks associated with a
given pathogen concentration (Petterson & Ashbolt, 2016b). Nonetheless, QMRA can provide useful insight and exploration of potential
outcomes that can be translatable to management actions (Ashbolt
et al., 2001).
Thus far, only a handful of studies have attempted to establish a link
between qMST and pathogen risks (Ahmed et al., 2018a; Boehm et al.,
2015; Boehm et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2017; Staley et al., 2012;
Symonds et al., 2016). In most of these studies, concentrations of
sewage-associated marker genes were linked to reference viral pathogen(s) in a hypothetical waterbody impacted by fresh untreated
sewage. The concentration of MST markers corresponding to the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) Recreational Water
Quality Criteria (RWQC) risk benchmarks were then used to compute a
concentration below which there would be a sufficiently low health risk
for primary contact recreation (USEPA, 2012). Sewage-associated
marker genes were used as the target because sewage pollution has
been shown to pose a greater risk to human health than that from animal feces such as that of gulls, chickens, and pigs (Soller et al., 2010).
The objective of the current review is to provide (1) critical reviews on
studies that linked qMST and QMRA; and (2) provide recommendations
and guidance to reduce uncertainties associated with QMRA analysis
utilizing qMST data.
2. Recreational water quality criteria
Recreational water quality criteria are intended to protect the health
of humans who engage in various types of contact with water. Greater
health risk is associated with primary contact, in which the body and
head are submerged in water compared to secondary contact such as
fishing and boating, where the volume of water ingested is lower
(Dorevitch et al., 2017; USEPA, 1986; USEPA, 2012). Most RWQC, including those of the USEPA, are based on the incidence of gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting (Table 1), although
a wide range of symptoms are associated with the many fecal pathogens
that collectively contribute to the risk of waterborne disease (Wade
et al., 2010). Epidemiology studies in which the relative risk of illness
for bathers and non-bathers is correlated with FIB levels in the water
are used to empirically assess human health risk from primary contact
recreation. This strategy, combined with designation of acceptable levels of swimming-associated illness, was used to establish the USEPA's
1986 and 2012 RWQC (Table 1) (USEPA, 1986; USEPA, 2012). We will
confine our discussion of recreational waters to criteria based on enterococci levels, as this FIB is approved for use in fresh and saline
(estuarine and marine) waters.
The epidemiology studies used to establish the USEPA's 1986 RWQC
(USEPA, 1986) were conducted at sites known to be contaminated by
sewage discharge but at relatively low levels. These prospective cohort
studies relied on surveys of volunteer participants for exposure data
(behavior at the beach), and collected self-reported data in phone
2



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

Table 1
Recreational water quality guidelines and illness benchmarks for swimmers based on enterococci (US EPA) or intestinal enterococci (EU).
Agency

Year
Established

Water Type

Enterococci
Criterion (CFU/
100 mL)

Illness Rate for Swimmers

Illness Designation

Symptoms

Citation

US EPA

1986

Fresh
Marine

33 GMa; 61 SSMb
35 GM, 104 SSM

8/1,000
19/1,000

Highly credible
gastoenteritis (HCGI)

USEPA, 1986

US EPA

2012

Fresh and
marine

30 GM; 110 STVb
35 GM; 130 STVc

32/1000
36/1,000

NEEAR gastrointestinal
illness (NGI)

CEU

2006

Fresh

200 Excellent;
400 Goodd
100 Excellent;
200 Good

AFRI: Excellent 1%e and Good
2.5%; Gastroenteritis:
Excellent 3% and Good 5%;

Acute febrile respiratory
illness (AFRI);
gastroenteritis

Vomiting or diarrhea with fever or
disabling condition or nausea or stomach
ache with fever
Vomiting or diarrhoea; nausea with
stomach ache; nausea or stomach ache
that interfere with usual activity
Acute febrile respiratory illness (AFRI);
(1) fever accompanied by (2) headache,
body ache, unusual fatigue, or anorexia
and (3) sore throat, runny nose, or
cough.
Gastroenteritis: vomiting, diarrhea,
nausea, or indigestion,

Marine

USEPA, 2012
CEU, 2006

a

Geomean.
single sample maximum.
c
statistical threshold value.
d
Based on the 95th percentile of enterococci levels.
e
1% correspond to excess illness in bather group compared to non-bather of 1 individual/100.
b

interviews conducted 8–10 days after their initial interview at the beach
(Cabelli et al., 1979). “Highly creditable gastroenteritis symptoms”
(HCGI) representing acute gastroenteritis (Table 1) were associated
with swimming at the polluted beaches for the 1986 criteria. For the
1986 criteria, geometric mean values of enterococci corresponding to
illness rates of 8/1000 in freshwater and 19/1000 in marine water were
33 or 35 CFU/100 mL, respectively. Corresponding single sample
maximum values at swimming beaches were 61 or 104 CFU/100 mL
(Table 1).
The USEPA's RWQC were revised in 2012 (USEPA, 2012) following
a new series of prospective cohort epidemiology studies termed the
National Epidemiological and Environmental Assessment of Recreational Water (NEEAR). The gastroenteritis symptoms recognized in the
NEEAR studies (Table 1), however, was changed by dropping the need
for fever, which changed the acceptable rate of illness to 32 and 36/
1000 for fresh and marine waters (Table 1). A discussion of this change
is given in Wymer et al. (2013). The 2012 criteria included a geometric
mean (30 or 35 CFU/100 mL for fresh and marine waters respectively)
and a single sample, statistical threshold value (STV) (110 or 130 CFU/
100 mL, respectively) based on the 75th percentile of FIB level
(Table 1).
The WHO (WHO, 2003) and EU Bathing Water Directives [Council
of the European Union (CEU), 2006] are based on a different epidemiological approach, a randomized control trial, in which recruited
participants were assigned to specific swimmer or non-swimmer roles,
and FIB measure at the time of swimming was estimated. For the EPA
studies samples were collected early in the morning not associated with
swimmers and considered to be representative for how routine sampling would be undertaken; whereas the European studies focused on
reducing miscalculation biases for the concentration of FIB swimmers
were exposed to (Fleisher et al., 1996). Two different syndromes were
considered for illness risk in the EU studies: acute febrile respiratory
illness (AFRI) (Fleisher et al., 1996) and gastroenteritis (Table 1). The
probability of illness is expressed as the excess rate in bathers (swimmers) compared to non-swimmers. Criteria of “excellent” and “good”
were based on the 95th percentile of FIB levels in multiple samples
(minimum 4/year), and differed for inland (fresh) waters compared to
marine/estuarine waters (Table 1) [Council of the European Union
(CEU), 2006]. Excellent water quality in coastal (marine/estuarine)
waters is specified at < 100 CFU/100 mL enterococci, which corresponds to an increase of 1 illness/100 swimmers (1%) compared to nonswimmers (Table 1), while good water quality is specified at < 200

CFU/100 mL, corresponding to a swimming-related illness rate of 5%.
3. Quantitative microbial source tracking (qMST)
Currently, most MST field studies use molecular marker genes associated with human and animal feces to provide insight into possible
fecal input sources impacting waterways. Most of the recently developed assays are quantitative. End-point PCR assays developed earlier,
such as those done for the human HF183 and nifH markers genes, have
been updated to qPCR assays (Green et al., 2014a; Johnston et al.,
2010). The major drawback of end-point PCR is that presence or absence results of a marker gene do not provide information regarding the
magnitude of the contaminating source. The reason why researchers
and regulators prefer MST marker gene analyses over other methods is
that marker genes are highly associated with hosts, their numbers are
greater in hosts compared to pathogens, sample filtration/concentration, nucleic acid extraction and qPCR analysis can be done within
8–10 h, and sample analyses are relatively inexpensive.
qMST data is crucial for regulators and managers as they provide
information on the extent and source contribution to fecal contamination of waterways. For example, if a recreational water body is impacted by sewage and the information on the concentration of marker
genes is known for untreated sewage samples and receiving water, it is
then possible to estimate the approximate percentage or equivalent
amount of sewage present in a given water sample (Ahmed et al.,
2018b; Olds et al., 2018; Sercu et al., 2011). While quantitative data is
essential to assess the magnitude of contamination, it can be difficult to
interpret by regulators and water quality managers who are concerned
with mitigation strategies and human health risk (Boehm et al., 2015;
Wang et al., 2013).
4. Linking qMST to QMRA
Regulators and water quality managers might ask: Why is it better
to link qMST to QMRA rather than to directly monitor pathogens in
receiving waters? This is because the concentration of pathogens can be
very low in waters at the exposure points due to dilution and decay,
while the MST marker genes, particularly for fresh fecal sources, can be
easily detected in water samples due to their high concentrations in
host feces or composite wastewater samples (Korajkic et al., 2014).
Schoen and Ashbolt (Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010) calculated that 9 genome
copies/L of norovirus (NoV) would be equivalent to the USEPA risk
3



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

target of 30 illnesses/1000 primary contact recreators based on the best
estimated DR model for NoV. However, detecting such a small concentration of NoV using molecular methods may be difficult and would
require processing a large volume of water sample on a scale of
10–100 L (Gerba et al., 2018). The levels of sewage-associated marker
genes such as Bacteroides HF183, pepper mild mottle viruses (PMMoV),
and the recently discovered crAssphage and Lachno3 marker genes are
1–3 orders of magnitude greater in sewage than are pathogenic viruses
(Hughes et al., 2017; Ahmed et al., 2018b; McLellan et al., 2018).
Therefore, by targeting these marker genes, a small amount of sewage
can be detected in environmental water samples, which is likely to be
more useful in predicting health risk than analyzing for the major pathogen group such as enteric viruses impacting recreators (Schoen
et al., 2011; Sinclair et al., 2009). As described above, from a management perspective, the main goal is to limit sewage contamination of
water, and MST can give a more straightforward and meaningful answer than assaying any single pathogen of sewage origin.
Another critical factor for risk assessment and management is that
both the marker gene and specific pathogens must exhibit high hostassociation. For example, sewage-associated marker genes such as
Bacteroides HF183 and HPyV, and enteric viruses such as human NoV
are predominantly associated with human feces or sewage. Therefore,
these marker genes can be used as a proxy to determine the risk associated with NoV and other enteric pathogens specific to sewage. To use
qMST marker genes in QMRA analysis, we need to know the ratio of
marker gene and reference pathogens in host feces or related sources
(i.e., wastewater or septage), and ideally how this ratio changes as a
function of environmental characteristics during transport to a human
receptor. Once the ratio/relationship is established, then the pathogen
concentration can be substituted with marker gene concentration data.
The pathogen data extrapolated from the marker gene concentration
data can be used in DR models to estimate to probability of infection
(Pinf), and subsequently the probability of illness (Pill). Thus, QMRA
modeling along with the qMST data provides options for analyzing the
health risk from a specific source of contamination and also allows us to
interpret marker gene concentration data concerning human health
risk.
Several studies are available that addressed QMRA of sewage-impacted recreational waterbodies using FIB or qMST. These studies
provide a useful framework for evaluating recreational health risks.
Studies in relation to FIB do not address qMST in the context of QMRA
directly, but set the foundation for qMST/QMRA studies. Schoen and
Ashbolt (Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010) determined the risk of gastrointestinal (GI) illness to swimmers in recreational water contaminated
with mixtures of fresh sewage effluent and gull feces related to 35 enterococci from either source. This allowed the predicted Pill from
sewage effluent and gull feces impacted recreational waters to be
compared to the USEPA risk benchmark of 10 illnesses/1000 primary
contact recreators (USEPA, 2012). Pathogens associated with each
source (i.e., Campylobacter jejuni and Salmonella enterica for gull, and
Salmonella enterica, Cryptosporidium spp., Giardia intestinalis and NoV
for sewage effluent) were selected as reference pathogens. The dose of
each pathogen in each source was then calculated using the abundance
of indicators and pathogens in feces. The Pinf for each pathogen attributed to each exposure source was calculated by using best-fit
parameters for DR models and a Monte Carlo (MC) simulation to account for variability in input parameters used to calculate the pathogen
dose. The resulting Pinf for each pathogen was multiplied by the best
estimate for the morbidity ratio (Pill|Pinf) to obtain Pill.
When the FIB level was 35 CFU/100 mL and gulls contributed 100%
of the measured FIB, the predicted median illness from reference pathogens (pathogens C. jejuni and Salmonella spp.) for gulls was < 2 log10
units than the illness benchmark value (i.e., 10/1000) for primary
contact recreators. When the assumed enterococci level was set to
20,000 CFU/100 mL, the median predicted risk from gulls exceeded the
illness benchmark, suggesting an upper FIB limit of health concern if

only gulls contributed fecal pollution. Moreover, when fresh primary
effluent contributed 100% of the enterococci, the predicted median
probability of GI illness was one log10 less than the illness benchmark of
10/1000 primary contact recreators for NoV, but the 95th percentile
was similar to the benchmark of concern. After NoV, Cryptosporidium
and Giardia contributed to the total risk but the median values were
approximately 4 log10 units lower than NoV (Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010).
Soller et al. (2010) conducted a relative QMRA to compare whether
cattle, chicken, gull, and pig fecal pollution risks to swimmers are different than risks originating from exposure to sewage pollution using
the approach of Schoen and Ashbolt (Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010). The
authors estimated Pinf and Pill from exposure to several reference pathogens including NoV, E. coli O157: H7, C. jejuni, Salmonella enterica,
Cryptosporidium, and Giardia lamblia. Recreational water was assumed
to be contaminated with feces from both animals and sewage. The Pill
from reference pathogens was calculated using pathogen-specific DR
models from the literature and MC simulations using concentrations
derived from USEPA regulatory limits of 35 and 126 CFU/100 mL of
enterococci and E. coli, respectively. A GI illness rate of 30 cases/1000
recreation events was used as a risk benchmark. The risk outputs suggested that GI illness risks associated with exposure to recreational
waters impacted by fresh cattle feces may not be substantially different
from human sewage-contaminated water for the reference pathogens
included in the model. The risk associated with fresh gull, chicken, or
pig feces appeared significantly lower than sewage contamination. The
authors suggested that care should be taken for the management of
cattle-feces associated impacted recreational waters. This is now the
basis for recreational water management in Alberta, Canada; with initial qPCR analysis of enterococci followed by analysis of water samples
for the presence of human and cattle-associated MST markers to decide
on the risk management action.
A smaller number of studies have established a direct link between
qMST and QMRA. For example, Staley et al. (2012) conducted a QMRA
study to estimate the risk of GI illness for adults swimming in waters
contaminated with untreated sewage. The authors determined the
process limit of detection (PLOD) of HF183 and human polyomavirus
(HPyV) marker genes by seeding several dilutions of untreated sewage
into waters collected from sites in Tampa, Florida, USA. The membrane
filtration method was used to process the water samples followed by
DNA extraction and qPCR analysis to determine the PLOD for each water
types. The PLOD refers to the smallest volume of untreated sewage that
can be subjected to the entire sample preparation process and still be
detected by qPCR.
Staley et al. (2012) selected NoV as the reference pathogen, and the
health benchmark of 10 HCGI/1000 primary contact recreators was
based on the 1986 Ambient Water Quality Criteria (USEPA, 1986). The
NoV concentration data were obtained from the literature (Teunis et al.,
2010). The NoV dose for each untreated sewage dilution was estimated
by multiplying the concentration of virus in sewage by the ingestion
volume and a dilution factor. Subsequently, the Pinf was calculated
using the hypergeometric DR model for non-aggregated virus suspensions. A MC simulation was conducted to capture the variation in NoV
concentration in sewage and the ingestion volume. Finally, the Pill was
estimated by multiplying the Pinf by a constant morbidity ratio (Soller
et al., 2010). For the majority of sampling sites, the HF183 marker was
detected in sewage dilutions with potential HCGI illness risks ≥ the
benchmark value of 10/1000 primary contact recreators. In contrast,
the PLOD for the HPyV marker was generally not sensitive enough to
detect sewage dilutions near the benchmark level, except for few sites.
Symonds et al. (2016) conducted a QMRA analysis similar to that of
Staley et al. (2012), except the authors selected PMMoV instead of the
HF183 marker gene and the risk benchmark was set to 36 NEEAR
Gastrointestinal (NGI) illness/1000 primary contact recreators as per
the USEPA ambient RWQC (USEPA, 2012). It was also assumed that
NoV was diluted in a similar manner compared to PMMoV during the
PLOD experiments. Consequently, the hypothetical NoV dose was
4



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

Table 2
Concentrations (GC) of sewage-associated markers in 100 mL of recreational water sample contaminated with fresh untreated sewage that exceeded the median
illness rate at a single event for reference pathogens.
Marker genes

Reference Pathogen used

Exposure scenarios

Marker gene threshold value GC/100 mL (risk benchmark)

Reference

HF183
HF183
HF183
HumM2
nifH
HPyV
PMMoV
HB
Lachno3
Gull

NoV
NoV and HAdV 40/41
NoV
NoV
NoV and HAdV 40/41
NoV and HAdV 40/41
NoV and HAdV 40/41
NoV
NoV
Campylobacter spp. and Salmonella spp.

Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Untreated sewage
Fresh gull feces

4,200 (30/1,000)
3,220 (36/1,000)
9,700 ((30/1,000)
2,800 (30/1,000)
144 (36/1,000)
1,010 (36/1,000)
544 (36/1,000)
7,800 (30/1,000)
14,000 (30/1,000)
106-107 (30/1,000)

Boehm et al., 2015
Ahmed et al., 2018a
Boehm et al., 2018
Boehm et al., 2015
Ahmed et al., 2018a
Ahmed et al., 2018a
Ahmed et al., 2018a
McLellan et al., 2018
McLellan et al., 2018
Brown et al., 2017

modelled for the untreated sewage dilution corresponding to the PLOD
of PMMoV. The median probability of NGI illness associated with the
PMMoV PLOD values for both coastal and inlet waters was 286/1000
primary contact recreators at the dilution 10−2, which was an order of
magnitude greater than the USEPA illness benchmark. These findings
indicate that the PMMoV marker would not be sensitive enough to
detect contamination at low concentrations associated with the USEPA
risk benchmark.
Boehm et al. (2015) similarly showed a relationship between concentrations of sewage-associated bacterial marker genes (HF183 and
HumM2) and GI risk of swimmers in recreational waters using a QMRA
study. The concentrations of HF183 and HumM2 marker genes in untreated sewage were determined from DNA samples collected from 54
sewage treatment plants (STPs) across the USA. The authors calculated
the fraction of sewage present in recreational water based on HF183
and HumM2 concentrations in sewage. A number of reference pathogens (NoV, Salmonella enterica, Campylobacter jejuni, Cryptosporidium,
Giardia, and Escherichia coli O157:H7) were selected for the QMRA
analysis. The concentrations of these reference pathogens in untreated
sewage were obtained from the literature. For an untreated sewage
contamination scenario, the likely concentrations of these reference
pathogens in recreational water were estimated based on the HF183
and HumM2 concentrations. Hypothetical serial dilutions were assumed to be representative of recreational water contamination event.
The risk benchmark used by Boehm et al. (Boehm et al., 2015) was
set to 30 NGI illness/1000 primary contact recreators (USEPA, 2012).
For both HF183 and HumM2 model simulations, NoV accounted for
between 70 and 100% of the predicted NGI illness depending on the
marker concentration. Campylobacter contributed approximately a
quarter of the simulated risk at the highest concentration of sewageassociated marker genes. The median simulated NGI illness varied between 0.0095 and 320/1000 primary contact recreators when the
HF183 marker ranged between 1 and 105 gene copies (GC)/100 mL in
recreational water impacted by untreated sewage. There was a linear
relationship between log10-transformed HF183 median concentrations
(in units of GC/100 mL) and simulated log10- transformed NGI illness
rates. On the basis of this regression relationship, a median NGI illness
rate of 30/1000 primary contact recreators occurred when the median
concentrations of HF183 and HumM2 marker genes were 4200 and
2800 GC/100 mL of water, respectively (Table 2). This is the first study
that determined sewage-associated marker gene threshold values using
a QMRA. Such information can be extremely valuable to regulators in
interpreting qMST data concerning potential human health risk and
developing plan for sewage pollution mitigation in order to meet policy
requirements. However, as illustrated by Schoen and Ashbolt (2010),
when treated municipal wastewater rather than raw sewage is the
contaminating source, the relative contributions from bacterial and
parasitic protozoa pathogens diminishes, leaving human enteric viruses
as even more important remaining pathogens.
In a recent study published in 2018, Boehm and colleagues used
their earlier simulation approach published in 2015 (Boehm et al.,

2015) to determine the risk of GI illness associated with swimming in
surface water. However, the authors incorporated the decay of both
sewage-associated markers and a reference viral pathogen NoV in the
DR model to determine risk associated with scenarios when the age of
contamination is unknown or water is contaminated by fresh untreated
sewage. The authors performed a meta-analysis to compile the decay of
NoV and HF183 marker genes. When an untreated sewage contamination scenario was considered, the risk-based threshold was
~9700 GC/100 mL which is > 2 times greater than the previously reported value by the same authors (Boehm et al., 2015). The discrepancy
in marker gene threshold values between these two studies could be due
to the fact that two different distributions of reference pathogens were
fitted and used in the models. Model results also indicated that a NGI
illness risk > 30/1000 primary contact recreators is unlikely when
sewage contamination in surface waters is > 3.3 days old. The analysis
suggested a risk-based threshold of 4100 GC/100 mL is warranted for
the HF183 marker gene when the age of contamination is unknown.
Ahmed et al. (2018a) performed a QMRA analysis to determine
threshold concentrations of HF183, nifH, HAdV, HPyV and PMMoV
marker genes that would indicate potential risk to swimmers in recreational water contaminated with fresh untreated and secondary
treated sewage. The authors used similar strategies as did Staley et al.
(2012), but instead of using PLOD, they used process limit of quantification (PLOQ) values of the sewage-associated markers that were diluted
in recreational waters seeded with fresh untreated and secondary
treated sewage samples. Both NoV and HAdV 40/41 were selected as
reference pathogens, and the risk benchmark was set to 36 NGI illness/
1000 primary contact recreators. The dose for each reference pathogen
was obtained from a previous study that determined the concentrations
of these viruses in untreated and secondary treated wastewater in
Southeast Qld, Australia (Hughes et al., 2017).
When NoV and HAdV 40/41 were used as reference pathogens
(Ahmed et al., 2018a), a median concentration of 3220 GC/100 mL of
HF183 in water sample represented a risk above the NGI illness
benchmark value when beach water was contaminated with fresh untreated sewage. Similarly, 3660 GC of HF183 in 100 mL of water sample
represented a risk above the benchmark for both NoV and HAdV 40/41,
when beach water was contaminated with secondary treated sewage.
HF183 marker gene threshold concentrations for both untreated and
secondary treated sewage were similar. This is because for the dilution
analysis, the starting volumes of untreated (3 mL) and secondary
treated sewage (150 mL) that were added into beach water samples
were different. If the volumes of secondary treated sewage were normalized, HF183 marker gene threshold generated for the secondary
treated sewage sample would have been roughly 50 times greater than
the value reported to represent the risk above the NGI risk benchmark.
In other words, the volume of secondary sewage needed to be 50 times
higher in recreational water to have the same risk as untreated sewage.
Concentrations of nifH and HAdV as low as 144 GC/100 mL exceeded
the benchmark risk of GI illness when beach water was contaminated
with fresh untreated sewage. HPyV and PMMoV concentrations as low
5



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

as 1100 and 544 GC/100 mL, respectively, represented risks above the
benchmark value.
Boehm et al. (2018) also established a risk-based framework and
developed a marker gene threshold at which the USEPA risk benchmark
was exceeded for swimmers in recreational water contaminated with
gull feces. The authors determined the concentration of gull feces-associated Catellicoccus (CAT) marker gene in the fecal slurry of 37 gulls
from six California beaches. Using the concentration of CAT marker
gene in recreational water, the model calculated doses of reference
pathogens Salmonella and Campylobacter spp.. The authors determined
that there was a linear relationship between the log10-transformed
median Pill and the log10-transformed CAT marker gene concentration.
On the basis of the regression analysis, the median concentration of
Pill equaled the GI risk benchmark when the CAT marker gene concentration was 4 × 106 GC/100 mL (Brown et al., 2017). The relative
contributions of Campylobacter and Salmonella spp. to Pill varied depending on a CAT marker gene concentration. For CAT marker gene
concentration of 106–107 GC/100 mL, Pill due to Campylobacter was
greater than the Pill due to Salmonella spp. by nearly an order of magnitude. The sensitivity analysis indicated that the model was most
sensitive to CAT marker gene concentrations in gull feces, the concentration of Campylobacter in gull feces, and volume of water ingested.
However, Campylobacter and Salmonella spp. in water samples may
originate from sewage and other animal species rather than gull. This
was not considered in the risk estimates.
McLellan et al. (2018) predicted the risk of enteric illness associated
with recreational exposure to human Bacteroides (HB) and human
Lachnospiraceae marker genes from sewage in river water. The authors
used the same strategies used by Boehm et al. (Boehm et al., 2015). The
DR model was used to determine the Pinf given that NoV dose, and the
Pill. Based on the regression analysis, 7800 GC of HB/100 mL or 14,000
GC of Lachnospiraceae/100 mL corresponded to a risk of 30 NGI/1000
primary contact recreators.
Derx et al. (2016) used an open access web-based QMRA model
called “QMRAcatch” to determine human-associated fecal pollution and
infection risk for a river/floodplain environment (Schijven et al., 2015).
The simulated concentrations of target FIB, Bacteroides HF183 and enteric viruses (from visitors and animals frequenting the study area)
were computed at points of interest along the main river and the
floodplain river at daily intervals for one year. The concentrations of
FIB, HF183 and enteric viruses (enterovirus and NoV) in the river were
computed based on dilution, lumped mixing, and decay rates.
The HF183 marker gene concentration was determined using a
TaqMan qPCR assay. With the calibrated tool and assuming viral source
concentrations from the literature, it was possible to simulate enterovirus and NoV concentrations at the point of interest in the floodplain river. Finally, it was possible to verify the simulated concentrations, within an order of magnitude, with available quantitative
enterovirus field data. The calibrated model was used to establish
sustainable water resource management options and required log-reduction values during drinking water production for the present situation and future scenarios. Scenarios covered different hydrological
conditions, number and extent of communal fecal emission sources,
epidemiological situations, sewer overflows, as well as varying amounts
of human visitors in the backwater area. Various degrees of sewage
treatment processes were also included. The model serves as a valuable
information resource to inform local (water) management authorities
and drinking water utilities.

assumptions. First, most of the published QMRA studies based on qMST
concerning sewage contamination used NoV as a reference pathogen,
except for Ahmed et al. (Ahmed et al., 2018a) who also used HAdV 40/
41 in addition to NoV. Enteric viruses are specific to human feces/
sewage and are therefore considered as the major etiologic agents of
gastroenteritis from recreational exposure to sewage-impacted waterbodies (Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010; Soller et al., 2010). QMRA studies
concerning animal fecal pollution such as gulls or cattle used C. jejuni,
Salmonella enterica, pathogenic E. coli, Cryptosporidium, and Giardia as
reference pathogens.
5.1. Dose response gaps
Although multiple DR models (Van Abel et al., 2017) are available
for NoV, there is no standard approach to NoV DR model selection.
Most authors in the research literature choose DR models at their discretion. All qMST-QMRA studies used the hypergeometric DR model
which predicts higher risks at low doses compared to other available
models (Van Abel et al., 2017). It is clear that model selection may also
affect risk estimates (Teunis & Havelaar, 2000). The DR model used in
qMST-QMRA studies did not account for NoV aggregation (Van Abel
et al., 2017). While it is unclear if NoV aggregation will occur in environmental water samples contaminated with fresh untreated sewage,
it is possible that aggregation may occur as sewage becomes aged or is
treated. There is a lack of knowledge regarding the degree of virus
aggregation in water matrices, and when more information is available,
a DR model that is more informed on the basis of aggregation could be
selected (Mcbride et al., 2013; Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010; Soller et al.,
2010).
Furthermore, the qMST-QMRA studies undertaken using NoV as a
reference pathogen (Ahmed et al., 2018a; Boehm et al., 2015; Boehm
et al., 2018; Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010; Soller et al., 2010; Staley et al.,
2012; Symonds et al., 2016; McLellan et al., 2018) assumed that the
ratio of total to infectious particles was the same in the hypothetical or
actual modeled sewage dilution as the fecal suspension used in the DR
study (Teunis et al., 2008). This assumption was made because the ratio
of total to infectious particles in the environmental inoculum is unknown. However, the DR model parameterization is only applicable
when this ratio is consistent (Bouwknegt et al., 2015; Teunis et al.,
2008). Situations when this assumption of the same proportion of total
to infectious NoV in sewage and contaminated water may differ (i.e.
increase the uncertainty) as discussed below, and would affect risk estimates.
5.2. Accounting for differences among exposed populations
While it has been assumed that the NoV DR model used in the
qMST-QMRA studies is applicable to both adults and children (Ahmed
et al., 2018a; Boehm et al., 2015; Boehm et al., 2018; Brown et al.,
2017; Schoen & Ashbolt, 2010; Soller et al., 2010; Staley et al., 2012;
Symonds et al., 2016; McLellan et al., 2018), the model was initially
developed using a healthy adult population (Van Abel et al., 2017). This
is a limitation as the risks are likely to be greater for immunocompromised populations (Gerba et al., 2018; Soller et al., 2010).
Differences among populations can also be accounted for via different
exposure scanarios such as the use of different accidental ingestions
volumes for adults vs. children; due to factors such as different exposure
times in water and different ingestion rates. Although not the dominant
source of uncertainty in QMRA models of recreational water exposure,
most of the studies reviewed used the volume of water ingested in a
pool setting, primarily for an adult population (Dufour et al., 2017).
Hence, the volume may underestimate exposure for very young children and could potentially differ between engineered pools and natural
water environments with a variety of recreational activities (Dorevitch
et al., 2017; Wade et al., 2008). None of the studies considered acquired
immunity and person-to-person spread of GI illness in QMRA analysis

5. Assumptions and limitations of qMST-QMRA studies
Logical and systematic selection of data for conceptualizing governing equations and informing parameter values, as well as clear delineation of assumptions, are critical components of the QMRA process
and are required to predict health outcomes (Fenner-Crisp & Dellarco,
2016). The QMRA studies described above make use of several key
6



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

because understanding of secondary transmission factor differences
among different susceptible populations is still incomplete and introduces additional complexity to QMRA models. However, acquired
immunity from one strain of NoV does not confer protection from other
strains. Hence, reinfection can occur throughout life (Payne et al.,
2015).

5.4. Understanding of the relationship between MST markers, pathogens
and their sources
MST marker genes should be present in contaminated water samples
when pathogens are present. However, only a small number of studies
simultaneously have monitored MST marker genes and pathogens, and
few reported the correlation between MST marker genes and pathogens.
A recent review highlighted that only two studies reported statistically
significant relationships, while seven studies reported a non-significant
relationship between MST marker genes and pathogens (Korajkic et al.,
2018). Human feces-associated markers may not correlate well with
zoonotic pathogens, such as C. parvum, G. lamblia and C. jejuni, as nonhuman sources will also contribute these pathogens in water. As a result, more studies are needed to establish a correlation between hostassociated MST marker genes and pathogens. For example, research
should focus on establishing associations between sewage-associate
markers and enteric viruses in sewage-impacted waters with respect to
time and environmental variables. While many of the current MST
studies have focused on using HF183 marker genes to estimate viral
risks, the relationship between pathogenic viruses and MST markers is
tenuous at best and influenced by many different factors. These factors
include the frequency of detection, variable host shedding rates, differential fate and transport characteristics, as well as a broad range of
site-specific factors such as the potential for the presence of a complex
mixture of multiple sources of fecal contamination and pathogens.
Furthermore, the concentrations of MST marker genes may be consistent in untreated sewage, however, pathogens such as NoV exhibit a
seasonal trend with greater concentrations detected in winter
(Nordgren et al., 2009). An ideal host-associated marker gene should be
uniformly distributed across host populations. Shanks et al. (2014) reported the absence of genetic markers in calves for up to 115 days from
birth, suggesting that physiological changes in calf ruminant function
impact host-associated genetic marker shedding.
While the concentration of pathogen in untreated wastewater may
not fluctuate considerably, the concentration/types of pathogens in
animal feces may vary significantly. Some animals shed high numbers
of pathogens (temporarily), and these are termed “super-shedders”. For
example, super-shedders are thought to be the most important source of
the zoonotic pathogen E. coli O157:H7 and possibly other waterborne
zoonoses (Chase-Topping et al., 2008; Matthews et al., 2013). None of
the QMRA studies considering zoonotic pathogens addressed the possibility of a super-shedder scenario (Boehm et al., 2015; Brown et al.,
2017; Soller et al., 2010).

5.3. Pathogen and MST marker quantification considerations
Several aspects of pathogen and MST marker gene quantification
play an important role in producing accurate risk estimates. The above
studies also assumed that MST marker genes and reference pathogens
quantified using qPCR are viable. However, qPCR provides quantitative
data on both infectious and non-infectious pathogens. Viability assessment is not a prerequisite for source tracking studies, however, when
used in QMRA analysis, harmonization may be required between
marker genes and reference pathogens viability/infectivity to reduce
uncertainties in risk estimates (Boehm et al., 2015).
None of the QMRA-qMST studies incorporated recovery efficiencies
of the MST marker genes or reference pathogens. Recoveries of MST
markers and pathogens are impacted by concentration and DNA extraction methods used to quantify these targets in source and receiving
waters, and maybe the most uncertain of any model parameter, spanning several logs (Petterson et al., 2015). Recovery efficiency data are
needed to correct MST marker gene and reference pathogen concentration data so that QMRA estimates are not underestimated or
otherwise biased.
It was assumed that sewage-associated markers and reference pathogens co-occur in recreational waters at the same ratio that they
occur in untreated sewage. This ratio may change due to episodic occurrences of pathogens or fluctuations of MST marker genes in sewage
(Ahmed et al., 2016). In addition, differences in treatment processes
and disinfection methods used (Soller et al., 2010), as well as other
environmental factors, such as: decay, predation, dilution, etc. may
alter the ratio. More data is required to establish a dynamic function
representing the ratio between MST marker genes and reference pathogens throughout the entire wastewater treatment process, accounting for the impact of post-treatment and other environmental
factors.
Most qMST-QMRA analyses conducted to date considered that the
contamination was recent and from relatively fresh feces or sewage,
with the exception of Boehm et al. (2018). However, pathogens may
decay by the time they reach recreational sites from their sources. Also,
decay of marker genes and reference pathogens are likely to be different
between DNA vs. RNA viruses and MST marker genes vs. culturable
pathogens. This is particularly important for fresh feces from avian
hosts, as their excreta are relatively small and dry rapidly in non-aqueous environments. After varying durations of transport in the environment, avian fecal pollution will age and both MST marker gene
and pathogens will start to decay. Studies have shown differential decay
of MST marker genes, FIB, and enteric viruses (Ahmed et al., 2016).
Various external factors such as water type, predation, turbidity, salinity, temperature, sunlight, and UV can affect decay rates of microorganisms (Anderson et al., 2005; Byappanahalli et al., 2012; Ishii &
Sadowsky, 2008; Korajkic et al., 2013; Rochelle-Newall et al., 2015;
Zhang & Yan, 2012). Most importantly, however, decay rates of different marker genes in relation to each other and to reference pathogens need to be determined under the same experimental conditions
(Ahmed et al., 2018c). If marker genes and reference pathogens decay
similarly in environmental waters, then marker decay rates can be used
as a proxy for reference pathogen decay. However, it should be noted
that the incorporation of decay data may not be required for studies
that consider risk from fresh untreated sewage immediately introduced
after contamination events, such as sewage spills and stormwater
overflows or significant storm events.

5.5. Host-specificity consideration
The summarized QMRA studies assumed that the marker genes were
highly specific to their respective hosts. For example, Brown et al.
(Brown et al., 2017) and other studies assumed that CAT and HF183
marker genes are highly specific to microbiota in gulls or human feces.
MST marker genes, especially those for bacteria, however, do not show
absolute host-specificity. For example, the CAT marker gene has been
reported to be found in excreta from pigeons and other bird species
(Ryu et al., 2012; Sinigalliano et al., 2013). Similarly, HF183 marker
has been reported cross-react with dog, deer, and chicken fecal samples
(Balleste et al., 2010; Gawler et al., 2007; Harwood et al., 2009a;
Harwood et al., 2009b; Stea et al., 2015). Consequently, markers that
exhibit low host-specificity in QMRA analysis will overestimate the risk
from a specific source, and therefore, provide risk estimates with increased uncertainty. Presumably, information about host-specificity
and host-sensitivity of MST marker genes could be accounted for within
QMRA models, and uncertainties or errors propagated within the context of MC models accordingly. Better capturing uncertainties
throughout the qMST-QMRA process would be particularly relevant for
water utilities and managers who are dealing with TMDLs, and would
benefit from identifying management decision switchover points for
7



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.

fecal pollution issues in catchment waters under multiple, sometimes
highly uncertain, constraints.

quality management and monitoring protocols, and in turn, reduce the
waterborne disease burden and minimize human health risk.

6. Recommendations and conclusions

Acknowledgements

Although most current qMST-QMRA studies make various assumptions and judgments due to lack of data and appropriate DR models,
there are numerous opportunities for improvement as the next generation of models are developed. The QMRA estimates can be improved
by incorporating decay rates, recovery efficiencies, and increasing
knowledge regarding the fraction of reference pathogens that are viable
or infectious. Sensitivity analysis needs to be undertaken to test the
degree to which the risk model outputs are responsive to variability and
uncertainty in underlying assumptions of the model inputs. For example, Brown et al. (2017) reported that their QMRA model was most
sensitive to the CAT marker gene concentration in gull feces, the concentration of Campylobacter spp. in gull feces, and the volume of water
ingested near the threshold value of the CAT marker. As more data
become available regarding the concentrations of sewage and animal
marker genes and enteric pathogens, Pill estimates can be improved by
reducing uncertainty in the distribution of these variables.
Marker gene thresholds are needed for PMMoV, HPyV, crAssphage,
Lachno3 and other promising MST markers that would exceed recreational water quality or other risk benchmarks in order to have a better
understanding of which markers are appropriate under various conditions, and which represent more conservative indicators. To date, animal marker gene thresholds have only been established for the gull
marker gene. Marker gene threshold values need to be established for
cattle-specific markers, as cattle harbor a suite of pathogens such as C.
jejuni, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, E. coli O157:H7 and other clinically
significant E. coli. While some QMRA estimates have shown that the
risks posed by cattle feces are similar to those posed by sewage, it may
be challenging to establish cattle marker gene thresholds as these pathogens also originate from other animal species. While existing calculations of MST marker concentration targets associated with desired
risk benchmarks have focused on setting a single threshold value, a
distribution of values (for example, by calculating a mean, range, and/
or 95% confidence interval values) for MST marker concentration targets would be preferred for such purposes.
However, target concentrations will vary depending on exposure
scenarios and environmental conditions, supporting the idea that a
universally applicable monitoring target may not be appropriate.
Rather, site specific tools could be developed to improve risk prediction
and management. The abundance of pathogens in recreational water
bodies varies temporally and spatially, depending on many factors.
Thus, QMRA marker gene thresholds developed in a specific geographical location may not be applicable to other geographical areas or
catchments with different land uses. This is because the pathogen
concentrations in source samples may be different. Therefore, sitespecific QMRA could provide insight that is directly translatable to
management actions at a particular location. Most qMST-QMRA analyses only considered a water ingestion exposure scenario (i.e., GI illness) for recreators to reference pathogens. Future studies should expand their focus to address potential health outcomes from other
primary contact scenarios such as inhalation, dermal, and conjunctive
exposures as well as exposure to boaters from wind driven water spray
and other secondary contact scenarios. QMRA frameworks also can be
used to determine the microbial risk associated with animal fecal and
sewage pollution in drinking water catchments. Further work that
concurrently evaluates QMRA and epidemiological approaches could be
used to assess the relationship between qMST marker genes and human
health risks at an impacted water body. Overall, improvements in many
aspects of current qMST-QMRA models are feasible but require additional information regarding MST marker genes and pathogen co-occurrence, fate and transport, and exposure. Improving parameters in
order to inform robust QMRA models can aid in improving water

We thank Dr. Nicholas Ashbolt for providing feedback on our
manuscript.
References
Ahmed, W., Goonetilleke, A., Gardner, T., 2010. Implications of faecal indicator bacteria
for the microbiological assessment of roof-harvested rainwater quality in Southeast
Queensland, Australia. Can. J. Microbiol. 56 (6), 471–479.
Ahmed, W., Hughes, B., Harwood, V.J., 2016. Current status of marker genes of
Bacteroides and related taxa for identifying sewage pollution in environmental waters.
Water 8 (6), 231.
Ahmed, W., Hamilton, K.A., Lobos, A., Hughes, B., Staley, C., Sadowsky, M.J., Harwood,
V.J., 2018a. Quantitative microbial risk assessment of microbial source tracking
markers in recreational water contaminated with fresh untreated and secondary
treated sewage. Environ. Int. 117, 243–249.
Ahmed, W., Payyappat, S., Cassidy, M., Besley, C., Power, K., 2018b. Novel crAssphage
marker genes ascertain sewage pollution in a recreational lake receiving urban
stormwater runoff. Water Res. 145, 769–778.
Ahmed, W., Zhang, Q., Kozak, S., Beale, D., Gyawali, P., Sadowsky, M.J., Simpson, S.,
2018c. Comparative decay of sewage-associated marker genes in beach water and
sediment in a subtropical region. Water Res. 149, 511–521.
Anderson, K.L., Whitlock, J.E., Harwood, V.J., 2005. Persistence and differential survival
of fecal indicator bacteria in subtropical waters and sediments. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 71 (6), 3041–3048.
Ashbolt, N.J., Grabow, W.O.K., Snozzi, M., 2001. Indicators of microbial water quality. In:
Fewtrell, L., Bartram, J. (Eds.), Water Quality: Guidelines, Standards and Health. Risk
Assessment and Risk Management for Water-related Infectious Disease. IWA
Publishing, London, pp. 289–315.
Badgley, B.D., Thomas, F.I., Harwood, V.J., 2011. Quantifying environmental reservoirs
of fecal indicator bacteria associated with sediment and submerged aquatic vegetation. Environ. Microbiol. 13 (4), 932–942.
Balleste, E., Bonjoch, X., Belanche, L.A., Blanch, A.R., 2010. Molecular indicators used in
the development of predictive models for microbial source tracking. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 76, 1789–1795.
Beer, K.D., Gargano, J.W., Roberts, V.A., Hill, V.R., Garrison, L.E., Kutty, P.K., Hilborn,
E.D., Wade, T.J., Fullerton, K.E., Yoder, J.S., 2015. Surveillance for waterborne disease outbreaks associated with drinking water - United States, 2011-2012. MMWR
Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 64 (31), 842–848.
Benham, B., Krometis, L.A., Yagow, G., Kline, K., Dillha, T., 2011. Applications of microbial source tracking in TMDL process. In: Hagedorn, C., Blanch, A., Harwood, V.
(Eds.), Microbial Source Tracking: Methods, Applications, and Case Studies. Springer,
New York, NY.
Bernhard, A.E., Field, K.G., 2000. A PCR assay to discriminate human and ruminant feces
on the basis of host differences in Bacteroides-Prevotella genes encoding 16S rRNA.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66 (10), 4571–4574.
Boehm, A.B., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Griffith, J.F., Holden, P.A., Jay, J.A., Shanks, O.C.,
Wang, D., Weisberg, S.B., 2013. Performance of forty-one microbial source tracking
methods: a twenty-seven lab evaluation study. Water Res. 47 (18), 6812–6828.
Boehm, A.B., Soller, J.A., Shanks, O.C., 2015. Human-associated fecal quantitative
polymerase chain reaction measurements and simulated risk of gastrointestinal illness in recreational waters contaminated with raw sewage. Environ. Sci. Technol.
Lett. 2 (10), 270–275.
Boehm, A.B., Graham, K.E., Jennings, W.C., 2018. Can we swim yet? Systematic review,
meta-analysis, and risk assessment of aging sewage in surface waters. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 52, 9634–9645.
Bonde, G., 1966. Bacteriological methods for estimation of water pollution. Health Lab.
Sci. 3, 124–128.
Bouwknegt, M., Verhaelan, K., Rzezutka, A., Kozyra, I., Maunula, L., Von Bonsdorff, C.H.,
Vantarakis, A., Kokkinos, P., Petrovic, T., Lazic, S., Pavlic, I., Vasickova, P., Willems,
K.A., Havelaar, A.H., Rutjes, S.A., de Roda Husman, A.M., 2015. Quantitative farmto-form risk assessment model for norovirus and hepatitis A virus in European leafy
green vegetables and berry fruit supply chains. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 198, 50–58.
Brown, K.I., Graham, K.E., Boehm, A.B., 2017. Risk-based threshold of gull-associated
fecal marker concentrations for recreational water. Environ. Sci. Technol Lett. 4,
44–48.
Byappanahalli, M.N., Fujioka, R.S., 1998. Evidence that tropical soil environment can
support the growth of Escherichia coli. Wat. Sci. Technol. 38 (12), 171–174.
Byappanahalli, M.N., Nevers, M.B., Korajkic, A., Staley, Z.R., Harwood, V.J., 2012.
Enterococci in the environment. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 76 (4), 685–706.
Cabelli, V.J., Dufour, A.P., Levin, M.A., McCabe, L.J., Haberman, P.W., 1979.
Relationship of microbial indicators to health effects at marine bathing beaches. Am.
J. Public Health 69 (7), 690–696.
Campos, C.J., Avant, J., Gustar, N., Lowther, J., Powell, A., Stockley, L., Lees, D.N., 2015.
Fate of human noroviruses in shellfish and water impacted by frequent sewage pollution event. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (14), 8377-8355.
Carbal, J.P.S., 2010. Water microbiology. Bacterial pathogens and water. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 7 (10), 3657–3703.
Chase-Topping, M., Gally, D., Low, C., Matthews, L., Woolhouse, M., 2008. Super-

8



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.
shedding and the link between human infection and livestock carriage of Escherichia
coli O157. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6, 904–912.
Council of the European Union (CEU), 2006. Directive 2006/7/EC of the European
Parliament of15 February 2006 concerning the management of bathing water quality
and repealing directive 76/160/EEC. Off. J. Eur. Union 2006, 37e51.
Derx, J., Schijven, J., Sommer, R., Zoufal-Hruza, C.M., van Driezum, I.H., Reischer, G.,
Ixenmaier, S., Kirschner, A., Frick, C., de Roda Husman, A.M., Farnleitner, A.H.,
Blaschke, A.P., 2016. QMRAcatch: human-associated fecal pollution and infection
risk modeling for a river/floodplain environment. J. Environ. Qual. 45 (4),
1205–1214.
Devane, M., Robson, B., Nourozi, F., Wood, D., Gilpin, B.J., 2013. Distinguishing human
and possum faeces using PCR markers. J. Water Health 11 (3), 397–409.
Dorevitch, S., Panthi, S., Huang, Y., Li, H., Michalek, A.M., Pratap, P., Wroblewski, M.,
Liu, L., Scheff, P.A., Li, A., 2017. Water ingestion during water recreation. Water Res.
45 (5), 2020–2028.
Dufour, A.P., Behymer, T.D., Cantu, R., Magnuson, M., Wymer, L.J., 2017. Ingestion of
swimming pool water by recreational swimmers. J. Water Health 15 (3), 429–437.
Fenner-Crisp, P.A., Dellarco, V.L., 2016. Key elements for judging the quality of a risk
assessment. Environ. Health Perspect. 124 (8), 1127–1135.
Ferguson, A.S., Layton, A.C., Mailloux, B.J., Culligan, P.J., Williams, D.E., Smartt, A.E.,
Sayler, G.S., Feighery, J., Mckay, L.D., Knappett, P.S., Alexandrova, E., Arbit, T.,
Emch, M., Escamilla, V., Ahmed, K.M., Alam, M.J., Streatfield, P.K., Yunus, M., van
Geen, A., 2012. Comparison of fecal indicators with pathogenic bacteria and rotavirus in groundwater. Sci. Total Environ. 431, 314–322.
Fleisher, J.M., Kay, D., Salmon, R.L., Jones, F., Wyer, M.D., Godfree, A.F., 1996. Marine
waters contaminated with domestic sewage: nonenteric illnesses associated with
bather exposure in the United Kingdom. Am. J. Public Health 86 (9), 1228–1234.
Gawler, A.H., Beecher, J.E., Brandao, J., Carroll, N.M., Falcao, L., Gourmelon, M.,
Masterson, B., Nunes, B., Porter, J., Rince, A., Rodrigues, R., thorp, M., Walters, J.M.,
Meijer, W.G., 2007. Validation of host-specific Bacteroidales 16S rRNA genes as
markers to determine the origin of faecal pollution in Atlantic Rim countries of the
European Union. Water Res. 41 (16), 3780–3784.
Gerba, C.P., Betancourt, W.Q., Kitajima, M., Rock, C.M., 2018. Reducing uncertainty in
estimating virus reduction by advanced water treatment processes. Water Res. 133,
282–288.
Green, H.C., Haugland, R.A., Varma, M., Millen, H.T., Borchardt, M.A., Field, K.G.,
Walters, W.A., Knight, R., Sivaganesan, M., Kelty, C.A., Shanks, O.C., 2014a.
Improved HF183 quantitative real-time PCR assay for characterization of human
fecal pollution in ambient surface water samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80 (10),
3086–3094.
Green, H.C., White, K.M., Kelty, C.A., Shanks, O.C., 2014b. Development of rapid canine
fecal source identification PCR-based assays. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48 (19),
11453–11461.
Haas, C.N., Rose, J.B., Gerba, C.P., 2014. Quantitative Microbial Risk Assessment, 2nd
edition. John Wiley & Sons.
Hagedorn, C., Robinson, S.L., Filtz, J.R., Grubbs, S.M., Angier, T.A., Reneau Jr., R.B.,
1999. Determining sources of fecal pollution in a rural Virginia watershed with antibiotic resistance patterns in fecal streptococci. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65 (12),
5522–5531.
Harwood, V.J., Levine, A.D., Scott, T.M., Chivukula, V., Lukasik, J., Farrah, S.R., Rose,
J.B., 2005. Validity of the indicator organism paradigm for pathogen reduction in
reclaimed water and public health protection. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71 (6),
3163–3170.
Harwood, V.J., Brownell, M., Wang, S., Lepo, J., Ellender, R.D., Ajidahun, A., Hellein,
K.N., Kennedy, E., Ye, X., Flood, C., 2009a. Validation and field testing of libraryindependent microbial source tracking methods in the Gulf of Mexico. Water Res. 43,
4812–4819.
Harwood, V.J., Brownell, M., Wang, S., Lepo, J., Ellender, R.D., Ajidahun, A., Hellein,
K.N., Kennedy, E., Ye, X., Flood, C., 2009b. Validation and field testing of libraryindependent microbial source tracking methods in the Gulf of Mexico. Water Res. 43
(19), 4812–4819.
Harwood, V.J., Staley, C., Badgley, B.D., Borges, K., Korajkic, A., 2014. Microbial source
tracking markers for detection of fecal contamination in environmental waters: relationships between pathogens and human health outcomes. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 38
(1), 1–40.
Hlavsa, M.C., Roberts, V.A., Kahler, A.M., Hilborn, E.D., Mecher, T.R., Beach, M.J., Wade,
T.J., Yoder, J.S., 2015. Outbreaks of illness associated with recreational
water—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 64 (24),
668–672.
Hughes, B., Beale, D.J., Dennis, P.G., Cook, S., Ahmed, W., 2017. Cross-comparison of
human wastewater-associated molecular markers in relation to fecal indicator bacteria and enteric viruses in recreational beach waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 83
(8) (pii:e00028-17).
Ishii, S., Sadowsky, M.J., 2008. Escherichia coli in the environment: implications for water
quality and human health. Microbes Environ. 23 (2), 101–108.
Ishii, S., Yan, T., Shively, D.A., Byappanahalli, M.N., Whitman, R.L., Sadowsky, M.J.,
2006. Cladophora (Chlorophyta) spp. harbor human bacterial pathogens in nearshore
water of Lake Michigan. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72 (7), 4545–4553.
Johnston, C., Ufnar, J.A., Griffith, J.F., Gooch, J.A., Stewart, J.R., 2010. A real-time qPCR
assay for the detection of the nifH gene of Methanobrevibacter smithii, a potential indicator of sewage pollution. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109 (6), 1946–1956.
Korajkic, A., Wanjugi, P., Harwood, V.J., 2013. Indigenous microbiota and habitat influence Escherichia coli survival more than sunlight in simulated aquatic environments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79 (17), 5329–5337.
Korajkic, A., McMinn, B.R., Shanks, O.C., Sivaganesan, M., Fout, G.S., Ashbolt, N.J., 2014.
Biotic interactions and sunlight affect persistence of fecal indicator bacteria and

microbial source tracking genetic markers in the upper Mississippi River. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 80 (13), 3952–3961.
Korajkic, A., McMinn, B.R., Harwood, V.J., 2018. Relationship between microbial indicators and pathogens in recreational water settings. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 15 (12) (pii: E2842).
Korajkic, A., McMinn, B.R., Ashbolt, N.J., Sivaganesan, M., Harwood, V.J., Shanks, O.C.,
2019. Extended persistence of general and cattle-associated fecal indicators in marine
and freshwater environment. Sci. Total Environ. 650, 1292–1302.
Lee, C., Marion, J.W., Lee, J., 2013. Development and application of a quantitative PCR
assay targeting Catellococcus marimammalium for assessing gull-associated fecal
contamination at Lake Erie beches. Sci. Total Environ. 454-455, 1–8.
Matthews, L., Reeve, R., Gally, D.L., Low, J.C., Woolhouse, M.E., McAteer, S.P., Locking,
M.E., Chase-Topping, M.E., Haydon, D.T., Allison, L.J., Hanson, M.F., Gunn, G.J.,
Reid, S.W., 2013. Predicting the public health benefit of vaccinating cattle against
Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110 (40), 16265–16270.
McBride, G.B., Stott, R., Miller, W., Bambic, D., Wuertz, S., 2013. Discharge-based QMRA
for estimation of public health risks from exposure to stormwater-borne pathogens in
recreational waters in the United States. Water Res. 47 (14), 5282–5297.
McLellan, S.L., Sauer, E.P., Corsi, S.R., Bootsma, M.J., Boehm, A.B., Spencer, S.K.,
Borchardt, M.A., 2018. Sewage loading and microbial risk in urban waters of the
Great Lakes. Elem. Sci. Anth. 6 (1), 46.
Medema, G., Loret, J.-F., Stenström, T.A., Ashbolt, N., 2006. Quantitative microbial risk
assessment in the water safety plan. In: Final Report on the EU MicroRisk Project.
European Commission, Brussels.
Mieszkin, S., Furet, J.-P., Corthier, H., Gourmelon, M., 2009. Estimation of pig fecal
contamination in a river catchment by real-time PCR using two pig-specific
Bacteroides 16S rRNA genetic markers. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75 (10),
3045–3054.
Nappier, S.P., Hong, T., Ichida, A., Goldstone, A., Eftim, S.E., 2019. Occurrence of coliphage in raw wastewater and in ambient water: a meta-analysis. Water Res. 153,
263–273.
Nguyen, K.H., Senay, C., Young, S., Nayak, B., Lobos, A., Conrad, J., Harwood, V.J., 2018.
Determination of wild animal sources of fecal indicator bacteria by microbial source
tracking (MST) influences regulatory decisions. Water Res. 144, 424–434.
Nordgren, J., Matussek, A., Mattsson, A., Svensson, L., Lindgren, P.E., 2009. Prevalence of
norovirus and factors influencing virus concentrations during one year in a full-scale
wastewater treatment plant. Water Res. 43 (4), 1117–1125.
Olds, H.T., Corsi, S.R., Dila, D.K., Halmo, K.M., Bootsma, M.J., McLellan, S.L., 2018. High
levels of sewage contamination released from urban areas after storm events: a
quantitative survey with sewage specific bacterial indicators. PLoS Med. 15 (7),
e1002641.
Payne, D.C., Parashar, U.D., Lopman, B.A., 2015. Developments in understanding acquired immunity and innate susceptibility to norovirus and rotavirus gastroenteritis
in children. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 27 (1), 105–109.
Petterson, S.R., Ashbolt, N.J., 2016b. Exposure assessment. In: Yates, M.V., Nakatsu, C.H.,
Miller, R.V., Pillai, S.D. (Eds.), Manual of Environmental Microbiology, Fourth edition. ASM Press, Washington D.C (3.5.2-1–3.5.2-18).
Petterson, S.R., Ashbolt, N.J., 2016a. QMRA and water safety management: review of
application in drinking water systems. J. Water Health 14 (4), 571–589.
Petterson, S., Grondahl-Rosado, R., Nilsen, V., Myrmel, M., Robertson, L.J., 2015.
Variability in the recovery of a virus concentration procedure in water: implications
for QMRA. Water Res. 87, 79–86.
Rochelle-Newall, E., Nguyen, T.M., Le, T.P., Sengtaheuanghpung, O., Ribolzi, O., 2015. A
short review of fecal indicator bacteria in tropical aquatic ecosystems: knowledge
gaps and future directions. Front. Microbiol. 6, 308.
Ryu, H., Griffith, J.F., Khan, I.U., Hill, S., Edge, T.A., Toledo-Hernandez, C., GonzalezNieves, J., Santo Domingo, J., 2012. Comparison of gull feces-specific assays targeting the 16S rRNA genes of Catelliococcus marimammalium and Streptococcus spp.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 (6), 1909–1916.
Schijven, J., Derx, J., de Roda Husman, A.M., Farnleitner, A.H., 2015. QMRAcatch: microbial quality simulation of water resources including infection risk assessment. J.
Environ. Qual. 44 (5), 1491–1502.
Schoen, M.E., Ashbolt, N.J., 2010. Assessing pathogen risk to swimmers at non-sewage
impacted recreational beaches. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (7), 2286–2291.
Schoen, M.E., Soller, J.A., Ashbolt, N.J., 2011. Evaluating the importance of faecal
sources in human-impacted waters. Water Res. 45 (8), 2670–2680.
Sercu, B., Van de Werfhorst, L.C., Murray, J.L.S., Holden, P.A., 2011. Sewage exfiltration
as a source of storm drain contamination during dry weather in urban watersheds.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 45, 7151–7157.
Shanks, O.C., Atikovic, E., Blackwood, A.D., Lu, J., Noble, R.T., Domingo, J.S., Seifring,
S., Sivaganesan, M., Haugland, R.A., 2008. Quantitative PCR for detection and enumeration of genetic markers of bovine fecal pollution. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74
(3), 745–752.
Shanks, O.C., Sivaganesan, M., Peed, L., Kelty, C.A., Blackwood, A.D., Greene, M.R.,
Noble, R.T., Bushon, R.N., Stelzer, E.A., Kinzelman, J., Anan'eva, T., Sinigalliano, C.,
Wanless, D., Griffith, J., Cao, Y., Weisberg, S., Harwood, V.J., Staley, C., Oshima,
K.H., Varma, M., Haugland, R.A., 2012. Interlaboratory comparison of real-time PCR
protocols for quantification of general fecal indicator bacteria. Environ. Sci. Technol.
46 (2), 945–953.
Shanks, O.C., Kelty, C.A., Peed, L., Sivaganesan, M., Mooney, T., Jenkins, M., 2014. Agerelated shifts in the density and distribution of genetic marker water quality indicators in cow and calf feces. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80 (5), 1588–1594.
Signor, R.S., Roser, D.J., Ashbolt, N.J., Ball, J.E., 2005. Quantifying the impact of runoff
events on microbiological contaminant concentrations entering surface drinking
source waters. J. Water Health 3 (4), 453–468.
Sinclair, R.G., Jones, E.L., Gerba, C.P., 2009. Viruses in recreational water-borne disease

9



Environment International 130 (2019) 104703

Q. Zhang, et al.
outbreaks: a review. J. Appl. Microbiol. 107 (6), 1769–1780.
Sinigalliano, C.D., Ervin, J.S., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Badgely, B.D., Balleste, E.,
Bartkowiak, J., Boehm, A.B., Byappanahalli, M., Goodwin, K.D., Gourmelon, M.,
Griffith, J., Holden, P.A., Jay, J., Layton, B., Lee, C., Lee, J., Meijer, W.G., Noble, R.,
Raith, M., Ryu, H., Sadowsky, M.J., Schriewer, A., Wang, D., Wanles, D., Whitman,
R., Wuertz, S., Santo Domingo, J.W., 2013. Multi-laboratory evaluations of the performance of Catelliococcus marimammalium PCR assays developed to target gull fecal
sources. Water Res. 47 (18), 6883–6896.
Soller, J.A., Schoen, M.E., Bartrand, T., Ravenscroft, J.E., Ashbolt, N.J., 2010. Estimated
human health risks from exposure to recreational waters impacted by human and
non-human sources of faecal contamination. Water Res. 44 (16), 4674–4691.
Soller, J.A., Schoen, M.E., Varghese, A., Ichida, A.M., Boehm, A.B., Eftim, S., Ashbolt,
N.J., Ravenscroft, J.E., 2014. Human health risk implications of multiple sources of
faecal indicator bacteria in a recreational waterbody. Water Res. 66, 254–264.
Soller, J., Bartrand, T., Ravenscroft, J., Molina, M., Whelan, G., Schoen, M., Ashbolt, N.,
2015. Estimated human health risks from recreational exposures to stormwater
runoff containing animal fecal material. Environ Modelling Software 72 (October),
21–32.
Solo-Gabriele, H.M., Wolfert, M.A., Desmarais, T.R., Palmer, C.J., 2000. Sources of
Escherichia coli in a coastal subtropical environment. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66 (1),
230–237.
Staley, C., Gordon, K.V., Schoen, M.E., Harwood, V.J., 2012. Performance of two quantitative PCR methods for microbial source tracking of human sewage and implications for microbial risk assessment in recreational waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
78 (20), 7317–7326.
Stea, E.C., Hansen, L.T., Jamieson, R.C., Youst, C.K., 2015. Fecal contamination in the
surface waters of a rural and an urban source-watershed. J. Environ. Qual. 44,
1556–1567.
Steele, J.A., Blackwood, A.D., Griffith, J.F., Noble, R.T., Schiff, K.C., 2018. Quantification
of pathogens and markers of fecal contamination during storm events along popular
surfing beaches in San Diego, California. Water Res. 136, 137–149.
Symonds, E.M., Sinigalliano, C., Gidley, M., Ahmed, W., McQuaig-Ulrich, S., Breitbart,
M., 2016. Faecal pollution along the southeastern coast of Florida and insight into the
use of pepper mild mottle virus as an indicator. J. Appl. Microbiol. 121, 1469–1481.
Teunis, P.F., Havelaar, A.H., 2000. The beta Poisson dose-response model is not a singlehit model. Risk Anal. 20 (4), 513–520.
Teunis, P.F., Moe, C.L., Liu, P., Miller, S.E., Lindesmith, L., Baric, R.S., Le Pendu, J.,
Calderon, R.L., 2008. Norwalk virus: how infectious is it? J. Med. Virol. 80 (8),
1468–1476.
Teunis, P.F., Xu, M., Fleming, K.K., Yang, J., Moe, C.L., Lechevallier, M.W., 2010. Enteric

virus infection risk from intrusion of sewage into a drinking water distribution network. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (22), 8561–8566.
USEPA, 1986. Ambient Water Quality Criteria for Bacteria −1986, EPA 440/5–86–001.
Office of Water. US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC.
USEPA, 2001. Protocol for Developing Pathogen TMDLs. EPA 841-R-00-002. Office of
Water (4503F), United States. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC
(132 pp).
USEPA, 2012. Recreational Water Quality Criteria. Office of Water, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, DC (820-F-12-058).
Van Abel, N., Schoen, M.E., Kissel, J.C., Meschke, J.S., 2017. Comparison of risk predicted
by multiple norovirus dose-response models and implications for quantitative microbial risk assessment. Risk Anal. 37 (2), 245–264.
Wade, T.J., Calderon, R.L., Brenner, K.P., Sams, E., Beach, M.J., Haugland, R., Wymer, L.,
Dufour, A.P., 2008. High sensitivity of children to swimming-associated gastrointestinal illness: results using a rapid assay of recreational water quality. Epidemiol
19 (3), 375–383.
Wade, T.J., Sams, E., Brenner, K.P., Haugland, R., Chern, E., Beach, M., Wymer, L.,
Rankin, C.C., Love, D., Li, Q., Noble, R., Dufour, A.P., 2010. Rapidly measured indicators of recreational water quality and swimming-associated illness at marine
beaches: a prospective cohort study. Environ. Health 9, 66.
Wang, D., Green, H.C., Shanks, O.C., Boehm, A.B., 2013. New performance metrics for
quantitative polymerase chain reaction-based microbial source tracking methods.
Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 1 (1), 20–25.
Weidhaas, J., Macbeth, T., Olsen, R., Sadowsky, M., Norat, D., Harwood, V., 2010.
Identification of a poultry litter specific DNA marker gene and development of a 16S
rRNA-based quantitative PCR assay. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109 (1), 334–347.
WHO, 2003. Guidelines for safe recreational water environments. In: Coastal and Fresh
Waters. vol. 1 World Health Organization, Geneva.
Wiggins, B.A., 1996. Discriminant analysis of antibiotic resistance patterns in fecal
streptococci, a method to differentiate human and animal sources of fecal pollution in
natural waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62 (11), 3997–4002.
Wymer, L.J., Wade, T.J., Dufour, A.P., 2013. Equivalency of risk for a modified health
endpoint: a case from recreational water epidemiology studies. BMC Public Health
13, 459–467.
Zhang, Q., Yan, T., 2012. Correlation of intracellular trehalose concentration with desiccation resistance of soil Escherichia coli populations. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78
(20), 7407–7413.
Zhang, Q., He, X., Yan, T., 2015. Impact of indigenous microbiota of subtidal sand on
fecal indicator bacteria decay in beach systems: a microcosm study. Environ. Sci:
Water Res. Technol. 1, 306–315.

10

