FOODBORNE PATHOGENS AND DISEASE
Volume 7, Number 10, 2010
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2010.0567

The Effect of Different Recall Periods on Estimates
of Acute Gastroenteritis in the United States,
FoodNet Population Survey 2006–2007
Laura B. Cantwell,1,2,* Olga L. Henao,1 Robert M. Hoekstra,1 and Elaine Scallan1

Abstract

Background: A number of countries have estimated the prevalence of acute gastroenteritis by asking survey
respondents to recall past episodes of diarrhea; however, the recall period used varies between studies. We
conducted a survey to examine the effects of 7-day and 1-month recall periods on the estimated annual episodes
of acute gastroenteritis. Further, we examine whether asking first about illness in the previous 7 days affects a
person’s response to a 1-month recall period.
Methods: The Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) conducted a population-based
telephone survey that included asking respondents about the occurrence of gastrointestinal symptoms. From
February through April 2007, we randomly split respondents into two groups to examine effect of recall periods
and question order. One group was first asked about symptoms in the 7 days before interview and then asked
about symptoms in the month before interview. The other group was asked only about symptoms in the month
before interview.
Results: Overall, the monthly prevalence of acute diarrheal illness (3 loose stools in 24-hours, lasting >1 day,
or restricting daily activities) was 7.7%. This proportion was consistent among the respondents who were
first asked about a 7-day recall period (n ¼ 1436) and those asked only about symptoms in the past month
(n ¼ 2132). Extrapolation from the reported 7-day prevalence of 3.1% to an annual rate of 1.6 episodes per
person, however, was almost twice the rate of episodes estimated when extrapolating from the month recall
period. Similar findings were found with acute gastroenteritis (acute diarrheal illness or vomiting without
respiratory symptoms).
Conclusions: First asking respondents about a 7-day recall period did not affect the prevalence of acute gastroenteritis reported for a 1-month recall period. Recall period length did, however, have a major impact on
estimates of acute gastroenteritis. Retrospective studies using different recall periods may not be comparable.

Introduction

A

cute gastroenteritis, caused by a variety of infectious
agents, many of which are acquired by consumption of
contaminated food, is a common cause of morbidity and
mortality worldwide (WHO, 2008). Because many persons
with acute gastroenteritis do not seek medical care or submit
a specimen for laboratory testing, only a small proportion of
foodborne illnesses receive a laboratory-confirmed diagnosis and are reported to public health surveillance (Scallan
et al., 2006). To better determine the overall human health
impact of foodborne diseases, some countries have conducted studies to estimate the prevalence and incidence of
acute gastroenteritis (Mead et al., 1999; Flint et al., 2005;

Scallan et al., 2005). These studies provide important information for prioritizing interventions aimed at preventing
disease.
Generally, studies of the incidence of acute gastroenteritis
for estimating the burden of foodborne illness fall into two
categories: prospective cohort study or retrospective crosssectional study. Cross-sectional studies are relatively less expensive and easier to implement than prospective cohort
studies. Although it is not clear which study provides the
most accurate estimate, prospective cohort studies consistently report a lower frequency of acute gastroenteritis than
cross-sectional surveys (Roy et al., 2006). The case definition
used also has been shown to have an important impact on
disease estimates (Majowicz et al., 2008).

1

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia.
*Present address: University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
2

1225



1226

CANTWELL ET AL.

Evidence also exists that length of the recall period may
impact estimates of the incidence of acute gastroenteritis, with
a higher incidence of diarrhea being reported among both
adults and children in developing countries when asked
about shorter, more recent time periods (Ramakrishnan et al.,
1999; Melo et al., 2007; Feikin et al., 2010). To examine the
impact of recall period on estimates of the incidence of acute
gastroenteritis in the United States, we designed the 2006–
2007 The Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network
(FoodNet) Population Survey to address two specific questions: Would a 7-day recall period result in a higher prevalence of acute gastroenteritis than a 1-month recall period?
If yes, would asking first about the illness in the past 7 days
affect the respondent’s response to a 1-month recall period?
Materials and Methods
FoodNet is the principal foodborne disease component of
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC)
Emerging Infections Program and is a collaborative program
among the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, and participating state health departments. FoodNet included 10 sites (Connecticut, Georgia,
Maryland, Minnesota, New Mexico, Oregon, Tennessee, and
selected counties in California, Colorado, and New York),
covering 44.9 million persons or 15% of the U.S. population
in 2006.
One of FoodNet’s primary objectives is to determine the
overall burden of foodborne illness in the United States. To
achieve this, FoodNet supplements active, population-based
surveillance for laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with
surveys of the general population to determine the prevalence
of acute gastroenteritis and associated medical care-seeking
behaviors. The FoodNet Population Survey is a telephone
survey of residents of the FoodNet sites administered using
methods developed by CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (CDC, 2002). Survey participants are selected through a two-stage process. First, a random household
is selected; then, an individual from that household is selected
at random using a computer-generated model that takes into
account the number of males and females in a household. All
persons residing in the FoodNet catchment are eligible with
proxy interviews of parents or guardians used for those persons <12 years of age. A professional survey research company conducted the interviews using a computer-assisted
telephone interviewing system, with the goal of 120 to 150
complete interviews per site each month.
To assess the impact of different recall periods when estimating the prevalence of acute gastroenteritis, the 2006–2007
FoodNet Population Survey used two different recall periods
during its fourth quarter (February to April, 2007) when
questioning participants about their history of diarrhea. The
survey included a 7-day and 1-month recall period, and also
changed the sequence of questions to assess the impact of
question order (Fig. 1). Respondents were randomly assigned
into one of two groups. The first group was asked, ‘‘In the past
month, did you have vomiting?’’ and ‘‘In the past month, did
you have diarrhea?’’ The second group of respondents was
asked, ‘‘In the past 7 days did you have vomiting?’’ and ‘‘In the
past 7 days, did you have diarrhea?’’ followed by ‘‘In the past
month, did you have diarrhea?’’ The survey included additional
questions on symptoms and illness severity, such as cough and

FIG. 1. Weighted prevalence of acute diarrheal illness in
the past 7 days and past month and varied question order,
Foodborne Disease Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet)
Population Survey, 2006–2007.
sore throat, number of loose stools in 24 hours, duration of illness, and number of days missed from work or school.
We tested differences in estimates with two definitions recently used in studies of foodborne disease in the United
States. Acute diarrheal illness (ADI) was defined as diarrhea
(3 loose stools in a 24-hour period) lasting >1 day or with
restriction of daily activities ( Jones et al., 2007). Acute gastrointestinal illness was defined as diarrhea (3 loose stools in
a 24-hour period) or vomiting, lasting >1 day or resulting in
the restriction of daily activities, and excluding those who
reported symptoms of cough or sore throat (Scallan, unpublished data, 2009). All analyses excluded persons reporting a
chronic illness in which diarrhea or vomiting was a major
symptom. To compare the month and week recall periods, we
multiplied the weekly proportion by 4 for an estimated
monthly prevalence and calculated an annual rate from each
recall period (number of episodes per person per year). We
calculated frequencies, with corresponding 95% confidence
intervals, and weighted all estimates to the FoodNet population to adjust for age, sex, and study design. SAS 9.0 survey
procedures were used for analysis (SAS v9.0, Cary, NC).
Results
The FoodNet Population Survey included 3862 interviews
in the fourth quarter when both recall periods were asked. The
participants were 59.6% female, 85.3% white, 6.5% black or
African American, and 6.6% Hispanic, and median age was
51 years (range, <1–99 years). After excluding persons reporting a chronic illness with diarrhea or vomiting as a major
symptom, further analyses included 3568 participants.
These participants were split into two groups, and among
the 2132 participants asked only about the past month, 7.7% of



EFFECT OF RECALL PERIODS ON ILLNESS ESTIMATES

1227

Table 1. Estimated and Projected Prevalence of Acute Diarrheal Illness and Acute Gastrointestinal
Illness in the United States, by Recall Period, Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance
Network (FoodNet) Population Survey,a 2006–2007
Month recall period
Actual monthly %
(95% CI)
Acute diarrheal illness
7.7 (6.1–9.3)
Acute gastrointestinal illness
6.4 (4.8–7.9)

Week recall period

Estimated
episodes/person/year

Actual weekly %
(95% CI)

Estimated
episodes/person/year

Ratio of annual estimate
(month:week)

0.9

3.1 (1.4–4.8)

1.6

1:1.8

0.8

5.2 (3.3–7.2)

2.7

1:3.4

a
Data from two independent samples are displayed for the 2006–2007 survey. One group was asked about diarrhea in the month before
interview, and the other was asked about diarrhea in the 7 days before interview.
CI, confidence interval.

reported ADI in the past month. Of the remaining 1436 respondents in the second group, 3.1% reported having ADI in
the past 7 days. These 1436 respondents were then asked
about diarrhea in the past month; 7.3% reported having ADI
during this time frame (Fig. 1). When extrapolated to estimate
the number of episodes of ADI per person per year, there were
1.6 episodes per year for a 7-day recall period, compared with
0.9 episodes per year for a 1-month recall period (Table 1).
When examining the impact of the recall periods using the
definition of acute gastrointestinal illness, the prevalence was
6.4% for a 1-month recall period and 5.2% for a 7-day recall
period, resulting in annual estimates of 0.8 episodes per person per year for a 1-month recall period and 2.7 episodes
per person per year for a 7-day recall period (Table 1). Estimates from a 7-day recall period were consistently higher
than from a 1-month recall period when examined by sex and
also by age groups.
The prevalence of ADI in the past month (7.7%) among
those asked only about a 1-month recall period was similar
(7.3%) to that reported by the other half of participants who
were asked first about a 7-day recall period and then about
diarrhea in the past month (Fig. 1).
Discussion
Recall period length has a major impact on estimates of the
prevalence of ADI and gastrointestinal illness, and estimates
derived using different recall periods may not be comparable.
Retrospectively asking respondents about illness in the past
7 days produced higher estimates than asking respondents
about illness in the past month, regardless of order in which
recall periods were asked. In fact, annual rates of ADI derived
using 7-day prevalence estimates were twice the rate estimated using monthly prevalence estimates, and annual rates
of acute gastrointestinal illness were 1.8 to 3.4 times higher
when using a 7-day recall period instead of a 1-month recall
period. These findings were consistent when applying either
the ADI definition or the acute gastrointestinal illness definition. To compare the burden of ADI or gastrointestinal illness
among retrospective cross-sectional studies, a common recall
period should be used. Standardizing these methodological
choices is also important if studies are to contribute to valid
estimates of the global burden of ADI.
We determined that first asking respondents about a 7-day
recall period did not affect the prevalence of acute gastroenteritis reported for a 1-month recall period. We had hypoth-

esized that responding to the question about a short recall
period (7 days) would influence the respondent’s answer to
the long (1 month) recall period. That is, the initial question
would have the effect of bounding the respondent’s recall,
therefore acting as a recall aid and increasing the accuracy of
respondent recall. For example, a study by Loftus et al. (1990)
found that respondents reported fewer health procedures
over a 2-month period when first asked about the number of
health procedures undergone over a 6-month period. We did
not find such an effect in this study. The 1-month prevalence
of ADI in the 2006–2007 Population Survey was the same in
the two independent groups despite one being asked first
about a 7-day recall period.
Without verification of the reports of illness, we are unable
to determine which timeframe gives a more accurate estimate.
Lee and Brown (2004) suggest that when people need to guess
the date of an event within a given timeframe, the tendency is
to take the midpoint. Further studies are needed to determine
if there is a consistent ratio between a 1-week and 1-month
estimate. This ratio could then be applied to the estimates so
that studies that used different timeframes could be compared. In the absence of such studies, only studies using the
same timeframe can be compared. Because we could not determine which recall period is more accurate, the FoodNet
Population Survey and other studies should continue to ask
about both periods. The authors recommend additional
studies or a future FoodNet Population survey that further
examines timeframe effects, including a 1-day recall period
commonly used in less industrialized countries, where
households are visited several times per week (Kosek et al.,
2003).
Conclusions
The findings of this study impact the design and analyses of
retrospective studies that aim to estimate the burden of acute
gastroenteritis. They underscore the need to consider the
timeframes used in studies when comparing estimates and
suggest that a 1-month recall period underestimates the global burden of foodborne illness.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the Centers for Disease Control
and Protection Emerging Infections Program, the U.S. Department of Agriculture Food Safety and Inspection Service,



1228
and the Food and Drug Administration Center for Food
Safety and Applied Nutrition. The authors acknowledge the
staff in the 10 FoodNet sites and the FoodNet working group
for their efforts in the FoodNet Population Survey.
Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
References
[CDC] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey Data. Atlanta, Georgia:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2002.
Feikin DR, Audi A, Olack B, Bigogo GM, Polyak C, Burke H,
Williamson J, and Breiman RF. Evaluation of the optimal recall period for disease symptoms in home-based morbidity
surveillance in rural and urban Kenya. Int J Epidemiol
2010;39:450–458.
Flint JA, Van Duynhoven YT, Angulo FJ, DeLong SM, Braun P,
Kirk M, Scallan E, Fitzgerald M, Adak GK, Sockett P, Ellis A,
Hall G, Gargouri N, Walke H, and Braam P. Estimating the
burden of acute gastroenteritis, foodborne disease, and pathogens commonly transmitted by food: an international review.
Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:698–704.
Jones TF, McMillian MB, Scallan E, Frenzen PD, Cronquist AB,
Thomas S, and Angulo FJ. A population-based estimate of the
substantial burden of diarrhoeal disease in the United States;
FoodNet 1996–2003. Epidemiol Infect 2007;135:293–301.
Kosek M, Bern C, and Guerrant RL. The global burden of diarrhoeal disease, as estimated from studies published between
1992 and 2000. Bull World Health Organ 2003;81:197–204.
Lee PJ and Brown NR. The role of guessing and boundaries on
date estimation biases. Psychon Bull Rev 2004;11:748–754.
Loftus EF, Klinger MR, Smith KD, and Fiedler J. A tale of two
questions: benefits of asking more than one question. Public
Opin Q 1990;54:330–345.

CANTWELL ET AL.
Majowicz SE, Hall G, Scallan E, Adak GK, Gauci C, Jones TF,
O’Brien S, Henao O, and Sockett PN. A common, symptombased case definition for gastroenteritis. Epidemiol Infect
2008;136:886–894.
Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dietz V, McCaig LF, Bresee JS, Shapiro C,
Griffin PM, and Tauxe RV. Food related illness and death in
the United States. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5:607–625.
Melo MC, Taddei JA, Diniz-Santos DR, May DS, Carneiro NB,
and Silva LR. Incidence of diarrhea: poor parental recall
ability. Braz J Infect Dis 2007;11:571–579.
Ramakrishnan R, Venkatarao T, Koya PK, and Kamaraj P. Influence of recall period on estimates of diarrhoea morbidity in
infants in rural Tamilnadu. Indian J Public Health 1999;43:
136–139.
Roy SL, Scallan E, and Beach MJ. The rate of acute gastrointestinal
illness in developed countries. J Water Health 2006;4:31–69.
Scallan E, Jones TF, Cronquist A, Thomas S, Frenzen P, Hoefer
D, Medus C, and Angulo FJ; FoodNet Working Group. Factors associated with seeking medical care and submitting a
stool sample in estimating the burden of foodborne illness.
Foodborne Pathog Dis 2006;3:432–438.
Scallan E, Majowicz SE, Hall G, Banerjee A, Bowman CL, Daly L,
Jones T, Kirk MD, Fitzgerald M, and Angulo FJ. Prevalence of
diarrhoea in the community in Australia, Canada, Ireland,
and the United States. Int J Epidemiol 2005;34:454–460.
[WHO] World Health Organization. World Health Statistics
2008. 2008. Available at www.who.int/whosis/whostat/
2008/en/index.html, accessed May 5, 2009. (Online.)

Address correspondence to:
Laura B. Cantwell, M.P.H.
University of Pennsylvania
608A Stellar Chance Laboratories
422 Curie Blvd.
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6100
E-mail: lcant@mail.med.upenn.edu

