898

© IWA Publishing 2017 Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

Associations between extreme precipitation and acute
gastro-intestinal illness due to cryptosporidiosis and
giardiasis in an urban Canadian drinking water system
(1997–2009)
Bimal K. Chhetri, Tim K. Takaro, Robert Balshaw, Michael Otterstatter,
Sunny Mak, Marcus Lem, Marc Zubel, Mark Lysyshyn, Len Clarkson,
Joanne Edwards, Manon D. Fleury, Sarah B. Henderson and Eleni Galanis

ABSTRACT
Drinking water related infections are expected to increase in the future due to climate change.
Understanding the current links between these infections and environmental factors is vital to
understand and reduce the future burden of illness. We investigated the relationship between weekly
reported cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis (n ¼ 7,422), extreme precipitation (>90th percentile),
drinking water turbidity, and preceding dry periods in a drinking water system located in greater
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (1997–2009) using distributed lag non-linear Poisson regression
models adjusted for seasonality, secular trend, and the effect of holidays on reporting. We found a
signiﬁcant increase in cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis 4–6 weeks after extreme precipitation. The
effect was greater following a dry period. Similarly, extreme precipitation led to signiﬁcantly
increased turbidity only after prolonged dry periods. Our results suggest that the risk of
cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis increases with extreme precipitation, and that the effects are more
pronounced after a prolonged dry period. Given that extreme precipitation events are expected to
increase with climate change, it is important to further understand the risks from these events,
develop planning tools, and build resilience to these future risks.
Key words

| climate change, diarrhea, extreme precipitation, water-borne illness

Bimal K. Chhetri (corresponding author)
Robert Balshaw
Michael Otterstatter
Sunny Mak
Sarah B. Henderson
Eleni Galanis
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
E-mail: bkchhetr@sfu.ca
Bimal K. Chhetri
Tim K. Takaro
Faculty of Health Sciences,
Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada
Michael Otterstatter
Marcus Lem
Mark Lysyshyn
Sarah B. Henderson
Eleni Galanis
School of Population and Public Health,
University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Marc Zubel
Fraser Health Authority,
Abbotsford, BC, Canada
Mark Lysyshyn
Len Clarkson
Vancouver Coastal Health Authority,
North Vancouver, BC, Canada
Joanne Edwards
Ofﬁce of the Provincial Health Ofﬁcer,
Victoria, BC, Canada
Manon D. Fleury
Public Health Agency of Canada,
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Bimal K. Chhetri
8888 University Drive, Blusson Hall 11300,
Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6

INTRODUCTION
Despite continual improvements in water treatment infra-

continues to be an important public health concern (Schuster

structure and analytical monitoring techniques in developed

et al. ). Every year, about 90,000 illnesses and 90 deaths

countries such as Canada, water-borne enteric disease

result from the consumption of unsafe drinking water in

doi: 10.2166/wh.2017.100



899

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

Canada (Christensen ). Historically, the province of Brit-

to 2009. The study location was selected because of its

ish Columbia (BC) has had a high rate of water-borne disease;

large population size and readily available data.

there were 29 water-borne disease outbreaks from 1980 to
2000, many of which resulted from water system failures or
the absence of adequate treatment (British Columbia Provin-

METHODS

cial Health Officer ). Cryptosporidium and Giardia are
two important acute gastrointestinal (AGI) pathogens threa-

Study location and study design

tening drinking water supplies especially due to their
resistance to common water treatments (Federal-Provincial-

We conducted this study in Greater Vancouver, BC, which

Territorial Committee on Water and Canadian Council of

is located on the temperate west coast of Canada. The

Ministers of the Environment ). The average annual

study area has a population of more than two million

BC incidence rates of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis from

people served by Metro Vancouver DWS. This DWS is a

2006 to 2010 were 2.8 and 14.7 per 100,000 population

surface water system that receives its water from three reser-

respectively (BC Centre for Disease Control ), higher

voirs in protected watersheds known as Capilano, Seymour,

than the national average.

and Coquitlam, located in the North Shore Mountains and

Although weather-related factors such as temperature

the Coquitlam Mountain (Supplement – Figure A, available

(Checkley et al. ), precipitation (Bhavnani et al. ),

with the online version of this paper). Capilano watershed is

and snowmelt (Harper et al. ) have been associated with

the westernmost of the three; Seymour is located east of

sporadic bacterial AGI risk in previous studies, generalization

Capilano; Coquitlam is the easternmost. These watersheds

to parasitic water-borne infections is difﬁcult due to non-

have a combined area of 52,831 hectares and receive

speciﬁc health outcomes considered in these studies. Further,

approximately 3.5 meters of rain and about 4.5 meters of

extreme precipitation events have also been implicated in pre-

snow pack at higher elevations annually and experience

vious water-borne AGI outbreaks in North America (Curriero

mild temperatures year-round (Metro Vancouver, ).

et al. ; Auld et al. ). Comparisons between studies are

The watersheds are closed to the public with the exception

difﬁcult because multiple diseases may be considered as a

of registered tours. Water is stored year round in the reser-

single outcome, and there are differences with respect to mod-

voirs, then treated and distributed by the DWS to

eling the weather-related variables. However, studies on more

surrounding municipalities via a network of dams, water

speciﬁc outcomes such as cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis

mains, pump station, storage reservoirs, and downstream

report seasonal variability in their incidence, with some evi-

disinfection stations. Each of the reservoirs supplies approxi-

dence of sensitivity to environmental changes such as

mately one third of the population. However, the

precipitation (Lake et al. ; Britton et al. ; Lal et al.

distribution area and the volume supplied changes accord-

). Weekly mean temperatures have also been associated

ing to water quality and operational demand. During our

with AGI (Allard et al. ). Climate change is expected to

study period (1997–2009), chlorination was the only treat-

increase temperature and the frequency and intensity of pre-

ment used in the study DWS with the exception of

cipitation in the future (IPCC ). Therefore, mitigation

Coquitlam water treatment plant, where ozonation was

and adaptation to climate change requires further assessment

added in 2000. Besides watershed protection and water

of the vulnerability of drinking water system (DWS) to

treatment, the DWS also relied on water quality monitoring

extreme weather events, and the environmental risk factors

(including turbidity and fecal coliforms).

that are likely to inﬂuence sporadic water-borne disease risk
in the present and the future.

We used a time series study design to assess the relationship between extreme precipitation, preceding dry periods,

In this study, we examined the association between

turbidity, and reported cases of cryptosporidiosis and giar-

major watershed level impacts of extreme precipitation,

diasis in the population served by this DWS. The work

dry periods, and temperature, and the occurrence of cryptos-

was approved by the research ethics board at Simon

poridiosis and giardiasis in a large urban center from 1997

Fraser University, BC, Canada.



900

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Datasets

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

percentile of the weekly precipitation distribution during
the study period. The 90th percentile cutoff was based on

All laboratory-conﬁrmed cases of cryptosporidiosis and giar-

previous research and expected increases in source water

diasis in BC are reported to the BC Centre for Disease

microbial loads following extreme events (Curriero et al.

Control (BCCDC) (Galanis et al. ). All cases reported

; Kistemann et al. ; Bush et al. ). The preceding

from 01 January, 1997 through 31 December, 2009 in the

dry period was calculated as the number of days with pre-

study area were extracted from the reportable disease data-

cipitation <0.1 mm/day in the previous 60 days. Daily

base along with their addresses. In addition, we extracted

measurements of raw water turbidity data in Nephelometric

the earliest date available from the following ﬁelds: date of

Turbidity Units (NTU) were obtained from the DWS. The

onset; date of specimen collection; or date of reporting. Infor-

weekly measure of raw water turbidity was deﬁned as the

mation on travel history and exposure (drinking water or

7-day average NTU.

otherwise) is not routinely collected and was not available
for this study. There were no documented drinking water-

Statistical analysis

associated outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis
during our study period. Cases were geocoded by address of

To characterize how recent precipitation was associated

residence at the time of illness using cadastral matching, or

with case counts, and whether this relationship differed by

by street address range interpolation matching. We then

the preceding dry period, we used Poisson regression with

ascertained whether a residence received water from the

a distributed lag nonlinear regression model (DLNM) to

Metro Vancouver DWS by: (1) matching the residence or

investigate a range of possible temporal relationships with

land parcel against a reference database developed during a

precipitation (Gasparrini et al. ). Detailed parameteriza-

previous study which includes Metro Vancouver water con-

tion of DLNMs is presented in the supplementary material

nections (Galanis et al. ); (2) assuming all Vancouver,

(Supplement – Statistical Model, available online). Tra-

Richmond, and North Vancouver land parcels receive

ditional lagged regression models impose a rigid, linear

Metro Vancouver DWS; and (3) assigning select portions of

combination of past predictors on the association between

West Vancouver land parcels to the Metro Vancouver

exposure and outcome. With DLNM, we were able to

DWS based on municipal documents. Geocoding and spatial

account for the effect of time using cubic regression splines

data analysis were performed using ArcGIS v. 10.0 (ESRI,

for a smooth, non-linear function of recent weekly total pre-

Redlands, CA, USA). The total number of cases reported

cipitation amounts going back up to 8 weeks. We set three

per week was calculated to create a weekly time-series.

knots for the regression splines at evenly spaced quantiles


Daily temperature (minimum, mean, and maximum C)

of the overall precipitation distribution, and at evenly

and precipitation (mm) data were obtained from the Paciﬁc

spaced values of the time lag (up to 8 weeks). This permitted

Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) for Seymour reservoir

increased spline model ﬂexibility, at the extremes of the pre-

(Supplement – Figure A) during 1997–2009. These data are

cipitation distribution and at the shorter time lags.

spatially interpolated at a resolution of 10 × 10 km using his-

We included a weekly precipitation up to a lag of 8

torical daily gridded climate data for Canada (McKenney

weeks based on the expected delay between precipitation

et al. ) and based on weather station observations. The

and reporting of AGI, which has ranged from 2 days to 2

interpolated temperature and precipitation data were used

months for case reports, outbreaks, and hospitalizations in

rather than actual weather station observations because they

previous work (Aramini et al. ; Curriero et al. ;

approximate the climate station observations (Supplement –

Thomas et al. ). The effect of recent temperature was

Figure B, available online) and allow us to compare them

incorporated using a 3-week moving average of weekly

with PCIC climate projections (PCIC ) in future work.

mean temperature. Extended dry or wet periods were incor-

Daily precipitation values were aggregated to 7-day

porated using an interaction between precipitation and a

cumulative weekly precipitation values, and extreme pre-

dichotomous variable for the preceding consecutive dry

cipitation events were deﬁned as those exceeding the 90th

period. This was deﬁned as 0 if fewer than 30 of the past



901

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

60 days had precipitation <0.1 mm/day, or 1 if 30 or more of

average turbidity per week ranged from 0.2 to 21.5 NTU with

the past 60 days had precipitation <0.1 mm/day. To account

a median of 0.48 NTU (mean: 0.87, Supplement – Figure C).

for seasonality in cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis unrelated

The best ﬁtting model included variables for holiday

to weather, we included sine and cosine terms with annual

weeks, precipitation, season, long-term trend, and the inter-

periods and a cubic spline term with ﬁve degrees of freedom

action between dry days and precipitation. Temperature did

per year. To account for differences in reporting and access

not appear to have a signiﬁcant impact on reported cases

to healthcare during weeks with public holidays (Allard

and was dropped from the ﬁnal model (Table 1). The

et al. ), we included an indicator variable for those

number of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis cases reported

weeks. Finally, to account for steady population growth

was lower in weeks with holidays (RR (CI): 0.74 (0.45–0.89)).

over the study period, we included the logarithm of time.

Extreme precipitation was signiﬁcantly associated with

We also investigated the effect of extreme precipitation on

increased cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis from 4–6 weeks

turbidity over 6 weeks using DLNM in a linear regression

after extreme precipitation, compared with no precipitation

framework. The Population Attributable Risk (PAR) was

(Figure 2(a)). The relative rates (RR) and their 95% conﬁ-

also calculated to estimate the proportion of cryptosporidio-

dence intervals for weeks 4, 5, and 6 were 1.13 (1.01–

sis and giardiasis in the population that is attributable to

1.21), 1.17 (1.07–1.23), and 1.15 (1.04–1.18), respectively.

extreme precipitation (Gasparrini & Leone ).

There was a signiﬁcant interaction between precipitation

Numerous models were ﬁtted using quasi-maximum

and preceding dry period (P < 0.02) (Table 1). Further, the

likelihood to select covariates (e.g., temperature) and model-

relative effect of extreme precipitation was higher following

ing parameters (e.g., degrees of freedom for spline

a 2-month period having 30 dry days compared with a 2-

functions). The best ﬁtting model was determined using

month period having <30 dry days (Figure 2(b) and 2(c)).

the Quasi-Akaike Information Criterion (QAIC) goodness-

The PAR of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis due to extreme

of-ﬁt statistic. All statistical analyses were carried out in R

precipitation was estimated to be 21% (95% CI: 14–27).

3.0.2 (R Core Team ) using package dlnm 2.0.6.

The 90th percentile precipitation was associated with
increases in turbidity until week 3 (Supplement –
Figure D, available online) and the effect of precipitation

RESULTS

on turbidity was different by preceding dry period (Supplement – Figure E, available online). When extreme

A total of 7,422 cases of cryptosporidiosis (n ¼ 969) and giar-

precipitation followed a period with 30 dry days, the

diasis (n ¼ 6,453) were reported in the study area during

effect on turbidity was more pronounced compared with

1997–2009. The number of cases reported per week ranged

extreme precipitation during wetter periods.

from 0 to 19, with the highest number of cases reported from
July to September (Figure 1(a)). Total weekly precipitation
during the study period ranged from 0 to 307 mm per week,

DISCUSSION

with a weekly mean of 41 mm (Figure 1(b)). Precipitation
was recorded during 89% of the weeks, with higher precipi-

We examined the association between extreme precipitation

tation occurring during the fall and winter. The 90th

and the risk of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis, and found

percentile of weekly total precipitation was 95.1 mm for the

that extreme precipitation had a signiﬁcant effect with a

entire period; the 90th percentiles for the dry (April–Septem-

lag of 4–6 weeks in a large, urban population served by

ber) and rainy (October–March) season were 54 mm/week

the DWS. This effect was more pronounced when extreme

and 128.4 mm/week respectively. The number of days in the

precipitation followed an extended dry period, after adjust-

preceding 60 days with precipitation >0.1 mm/day ranged

ing for seasonality, long-term trends, and delays on

from 3 to 57 with a mean of 29 days (Supplement – Figure C,

reporting due to holidays.

available with the online version of this paper). Weekly average

Numerous studies have found associations between high

temperature was 5.8  C with a range of 5.6 to 25.6  C. The

precipitation and AGI outbreaks (Curriero et al. ; Auld



B. K. Chhetri et al.

902

Figure 1

Table 1

|

|

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

Boxplots of (a) number of cases of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis and (b) precipitation per week, grouped by months, in Metro Vancouver DWS, BC, Canada, 1997–2009. The
upper whisker extends from the hinge to the highest value that is within 1.5 * IQR of the hinge, where IQR is the inter-quartile range.

The effects of environmental characteristics and model parameters on the risk of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis in Metro Vancouver DWS, British Columbia, Canada, 1997–2009

Variablea

RR (CI)b

Wald P value

No

Ref

–

Yes

LRT (P-value)c

Holiday week
0.74 (0.45–0.89)

<0.01

Temperature (C) (0–3 week)

1.03 (0.86–1.34)

0.54

Fourier term

–

–

<0.01

Spline term

–

–

0.03

Precipitation function

–

–

0.01

Dry days * precipitation function

–

–

<0.01

a

Temperature is modeled as linear variable representing 3-week moving average, Fourier term adjusts for seasonality; spline term adjusts for trend; precipitation function represents two

dimensional parameters for precipitation across its value and lags.
b
Relative rates (95% conﬁdence intervals).
c

P-values associated with likelihood ratio tests.



903

Figure 2

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

Change in counts of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis in Metro Vancouver DWS, BC, Canada over an 8-week period following extreme precipitation (a) and by preceding number
of dry days (b) and (c). Dots represent point estimates (relative rates) and bars represent 95% CI. Variables in the model are holiday weeks, precipitation, season (Fourier terms),
trend, and interaction between dry days and precipitation.



904

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

et al. ; Thomas et al. ), as well as with sporadic bac-

The effect of extreme precipitation on cryptosporidiosis

terial AGI (Harper et al. ; Uejio et al. ). Further,

and giardiasis was found to be greater following a prolonged

correlations between increased precipitation and increased

dry period when compared with a relatively wet period. We

Cryptosporidium oocyst and Giardia cyst concentrations in

also found a marked difference in the effect of extreme pre-

river water have also been reported (Atherholt et al. ).

cipitation on source water turbidity following dry periods.

In contrast to others, our study considered highly speciﬁc

Similarly, a study from Ecuador reported an increased inci-

outcomes (laboratory-conﬁrmed diseases) that are known

dence of non-speciﬁc diarrhea after dry periods and

to be associated with drinking water.

decreased incidence after wet periods (Carlton et al. ).

The ﬁnding of an association between extreme precipi-

Association between heavy precipitation following dry

tation and parasitic infections at 4–6 weeks is consistent

periods and E. coli outbreaks has also been reported

with the latency of these diseases and known delays in

(Effler et al. ). Prolonged dry periods may lead to soil

reporting. The effect of extreme precipitation on turbidity

compaction which, when followed by heavy precipitation,

can last 1–3 weeks. The incubation period of these patho-

facilitates overland run off into reservoirs (Lake et al.

gens is 2 days to 3 weeks, with a median of 7–10 days for

; Britton et al. ), leading to increased turbidity and

both outcomes (Chin ). In BC, it takes a median of

increased pathogen loads. After the most readily accessible

1–2 weeks from onset of illness to reporting of cases for

pathogens are ﬂushed from the watershed, prolonged

other enteric diseases, including salmonellosis, shigellosis,

rainfall could reduce the concentration of the remaining

listeriosis, and Shiga-toxin producing Escherichia coli

pathogens. Similarly, another study from BC reported

(STEC) infection (Galanis et al. ). The waxing and

increased risk of AGI in the fall (Galanis et al. ),

waning of parasitic infection symptoms may delay health-

which is when rains begin after dry summers and spikes in

care seeking and testing and further extend this interval.
There are several pathways by which extreme precipitation

can

lead

to

cryptosporidiosis

and

giardiasis

turbidity occur in the study area (Supplement – Figure C).
It is important that watersheds are protected and the
source water is treated to mitigate these effects.

(Supplement – Figure F, available with the online version of

We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant association between temp-

this paper). We found increased turbidity over the 3-week

erature and AGI. Temperature is speculated to affect the risk

period following extreme precipitation. Extreme precipitation

of infection by favoring pathogen infectivity, shedding in

may directly increase turbidity or act indirectly by increasing

animal reservoirs, as well as increasing opportunities for

overland runoff into water systems, thereby increasing patho-

pathogen–host interactions (Semenza et al. ). During

gen transfer from environmental reservoirs (e.g., animal

springtime higher temperature may also contribute to

manure) into surface water (Lake et al. ; Galway et al.

increases in stream ﬂow and turbidity due to rapid snowmelt

). It could also promote resuspension of infectious cysts/

(Harper et al. ; Galway et al. ). While we included a

oocysts from tributary river sediments (Atherholt et al. ).

3-week moving average of weekly mean temperature, the

Furthermore, the increase in water turbidity following precipi-

effect of temperature was likely captured by the background

tation can reduce the efﬁcacy of drinking water treatment

seasonal terms in the model. Previous studies have reported

(Aramini et al. ; Schwartz et al. ). Chlorination was

seasonal differences in the relationship between tempera-

the main treatment used in the study DWS during 1997–

ture and AGI (Checkley et al. ; Lake et al. )

2009, and ozonation was added to one of the three reservoirs

suggesting that observed association between temperature

starting in 2000. Chlorination alone is not effective against

and disease can also be inﬂuenced by seasonal factors not

Cryptosporidium, whereas Giardia requires high concen-

related to temperature (Levy et al. ).

trations of chlorine and extended contact time to be effective

The DLNM allowed us to ﬂexibly incorporate the non-

(British Columbia Provincial Health Officer ). An

linear effects of precipitation on disease as well as the

approach integrating physical removal (e.g., ﬁltration) and dis-

delayed effects. Both linear (Bhavnani et al. ; Galway

infection barriers is the most effective way to reduce protozoa

et al. ) and non-linear (Bush et al. ) associations

in drinking water (Health Canada ).

between precipitation and disease have been investigated.



905

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

The appropriateness of the form of the relationship seems to

disinfection, a well-maintained distribution system, and moni-

be driven by the nature of the data.

toring the effectiveness of treatment is regarded as the best

Given that our study investigates impacts of precipi-

approach to reduce protozoa in drinking water (Health

implicitly

Canada ). Previous research from our study area found

assumed that exposure to cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis

that following periods of increased turbidity, the rates of

occurred at home. It is possible, however, that cases were

healthcare utilization for gastroenteritis increased in this

tation

via

residential

drinking

water,

we

exposed to other drinking water sources as well, such as

watershed in 1992–1998 (Aramini et al. ). Subsequently,

those in the workplace. Nevertheless, commuting patterns

Metro Vancouver made signiﬁcant improvements to ensure

in Metro Vancouver indicate that the majority of residents

safe drinking water and decrease the incidence of water-

also work in Metro Vancouver (Skelton ) and thus

borne illness utilizing a multi-barrier approach. Watersheds

remain on the same DWS. It is possible that illness might

are protected: improved water treatment technologies include

have been acquired by direct contact with infected

ﬁltration and ozonation to achieve 3-log removal/inactivation

humans and animals, recreational water use, food, or

(99.9% removal) of Cryptosporidium and Giardia, secondary

other transmission pathways. Despite some inevitable mis-

disinfection and monitoring for turbidity, Giardia and Cryp-

classiﬁcation, extreme precipitation was associated with an

tosporidium. Water ﬁltration and ultraviolet disinfection

increase in turbidity and with the risk of cryptosporidiosis

were implemented in the Seymour reservoir in 2010, and

and giardiasis indicating that the route of transmission was

engineering upgrades completed in 2015 now also allow the

probably by drinking water. Our study population received

Capilano reservoir water to be treated at Seymour by ﬁl-

water from three different reservoirs with varying water

tration and ultraviolet disinfection. Besides ozonation,

quality as well as varying susceptibility to turbidity events

ultraviolet disinfection was also added to treat water at the

and contamination. Further, heavy precipitation may not

Coquitlam reservoir in 2014. When we analyzed the 3 years

only affect the water source but also contribute to microbial

after partial ﬁltration came into effect (2010–2012), the

contamination in the water distribution systems. The magni-

association between extreme precipitation and the risk of

tude of associations observed for the precipitation–disease

cryptosporidiosis or giardiasis was no longer evident

relationships are relatively small in this study; however,

(Supplement – Figure G, available online). These preliminary

the impact of extreme precipitation on a population is

ﬁndings show a positive impact possibly attributed to ﬁl-

much larger. According to a previous study from Canada,

tration; further years of data would provide stronger

it is estimated that for every 300 cases of enteric illness in

evidence of this association. By addressing key drinking

the community, only one case is reported (Majowicz et al.

water quality risks, Metro Vancouver provides a model for

). Therefore, reported gastrointestinal illnesses rep-

other systems. This reﬂects the importance of drinking

resent only a small fraction of true disease burden in the

water treatment enhancements implemented by Metro Van-

community, and small increases in risk may lead to large

couver to alleviate the effect of extreme precipitation on

increases in cases in the population. Further, the estimated

drinking water quality. Given that the frequency of extreme

PAR indicated that 21% of the cryptosporidiosis and giardia-

precipitation is expected to increase with climate change,

sis cases in our population were due to extreme

adaptation, and mitigation to such events using a multi-

precipitation and indicate that a large amount of disease

barrier approach is especially relevant in the context of

in the population can be prevented by mitigating the effects

changing climate (IPCC ).

of extreme precipitation on DWSs.
In order to mitigate the effect of extreme precipitation,
we need resilient water treatment systems, infrastructure,

CONCLUSION

and watershed management to prevent contamination of
drinking water.
A

multi-barrier

protection,

In conclusion, our results suggest that the risk of cryptosporapproach

appropriate

incorporating

treatment,

optimized

watershed

idiosis and giardiasis in an unﬁltered DWS is associated with

ﬁltration,

extreme precipitation mediated through drinking water, with



906

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

a greater effect evident after a prolonged dry period. Substantial burden of water-borne disease in the population can be
prevented by mitigating the effects of extreme precipitation
on DWSs. With more climate variability, extreme rain
events, and prolonged dry periods are likely to become
more frequent in the future and the burden of AGI may
increase. As such, it is vital to further understand the risks
posed by climate change, to develop planning tools, and to
adopt mitigation technologies like improved treatment so
that DWSs become more resilient to these future risks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by funding from the Public
Health Agency of Canada for the study titled ‘The Impact
of Climate Change on Drinking Water and Health in
Vulnerable Drinking Water Systems’. We would like to
thank Rossitta Yung, Antonio Gasparrini, Stephen Sobie,
Jordan Brubacher, and Sylvia Struck for their assistance in
study design, data acquisition, intellectual inputs in the
analysis, and interpretation of results. We also thank
Metro Vancouver for providing water turbidity data.

REFERENCES
Allard, R., Plante, C., Garnier, C. & Kosatsky, T.  The reported
incidence of campylobacteriosis modelled as a function of
earlier temperatures and numbers of cases, Montreal,
Canada, 1990–2006. Int. J. Biometeorol. 55, 353–360.
Aramini, J., McLean, M., Wilson, J., Holt, J., Copes, R., Allen, B. &
Sears, W.  Drinking water quality and health care
utilization for gastrointestinal illness in Greater Vancouver.
Canada Commun. Dis. Rep. 26, 211–214.
Atherholt, T. B., LeChevallier, M. W., Norton, W. D. & Rosen, J. S.
 Effect of rainfall on Giardia and Crypto. J. Am. Water
Works Assoc. 90, 66–80.
Auld, H., MacIver, D. & Klaassen, J.  Heavy rainfall and
waterborne disease outbreaks: the Walkerton example.
J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A 67, 1879–1887.
BC Centre for Disease Control  British Columbia Annual
Summary of Reportable Diseases 2013. http://www.bccdc.
ca/NR/rdonlyres/D8C85F70-804C-48DB-8A646009C9FD49A3/0/2013CDAnnualReportFinal.pdf
(accessed 6 February 2015).
Bhavnani, D., Goldstick, J. E., Cevallos, W., Trueba, G. &
Eisenberg, J. N.  Impact of rainfall on diarrheal disease

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

risk associated with unimproved water and sanitation. Am. J.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 90, 705–711.
British Columbia Provincial Health Ofﬁcer  A Report on the
Health of British Columbians. Drinking Water Quality in
British Columbia: The Public Health Perspective. British
Columbia Ministry of Health Planning, Ofﬁce of the
Provincial Health Ofﬁcer, Victoria, BC.
Britton, E., Hales, S., Venugopal, K. & Baker, M. G.  The impact
of climate variability and change on cryptosporidiosis and
giardiasis rates in New Zealand. J. Water Health 8, 561–571.
Bush, K. F., O’Neill, M. S., Li, S., Mukherjee, B., Hu, H., Ghosh, S.
& Balakrishnan, K.  Associations between extreme
precipitation and gastrointestinal-related hospital admissions
in Chennai, India. Environ. Health Persp. 122, 249–254. doi:
10.1289/ehp.1306807
Carlton, E. J., Eisenberg, J. N., Goldstick, J., Cevallos, W., Trostle, J.
& Levy, K.  Heavy rainfall events and diarrhea incidence:
the role of social and environmental factors. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 179, 344–352.
Checkley, W., Epstein, L. D., Gilman, R. H., Figueroa, D., Cama,
R. I., Patz, J. A. & Black, R. E.  Effect of El Nino and
ambient temperature on hospital admissions for diarrhoeal
diseases in Peruvian children. Lancet 355, 442–450. doi:10.
1016/S0140-6736(00)82010-3
Chin, J.  Control of Communicable Diseases Manual, 17th
edn. American Public Health Association, Washington, DC.
Christensen, R.  Canada’s Drinking Water Report Card.
https://www.ecojustice.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/
Waterproof_Essentials_web_corrected_Dec_8.pdf (accessed
6 March 2015).
Curriero, F. C., Patz, J. A., Rose, J. B. & Lele, S.  The
association between extreme precipitation and waterborne
disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. Am. J.
Public Health 91, 1194–1199.
Efﬂer, E., Isaäcson, M., Arntzen, L., Heenan, R., Canter, P., Barrett,
T., Lee, L., Mambo, C., Levine, W., Zaidi, A. & Grifﬁn, P. M.
 Factors contributing to the emergence of Escherichia coli
o157 in Africa. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 7, 812–819.
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Water and Canadian
Council of Ministers of the Environment WQTG  From
Source to tap: Guidance on the Multi-Barrier Approach to
Safe Drinking Water. Canadian Council of Ministers of the
Environment, Winnipeg, MB.
Galanis, E., Mak, S., Otterstatter, M., Taylor, M., Zubel, M.,
Takaro, T. K., Kuo, M. & Michel, P.  The association
between campylobacteriosis, agriculture and drinking water:
a case-case study in a region of British Columbia, Canada,
2005–2009. Epidemiol. Infect. 142, 2075–2084.
Galanis, E., Taylor, M., Romanowski, K., Stone, J., Nowakowski,
C., Jeyes, J., Bitzikos, O., Tone, G., Forsting, S., Paccagnella,
A., Li, S., Murti, M. & Hoang, L.  Evaluation of the
timeliness of enteric disease surveillance: is achieving the
benchmark good enough? In: Proceedings of the 2015
International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases,
Aug 24–28 2015, Atlanta, GA.



907

B. K. Chhetri et al.

|

Impact of extreme precipitation on drinking water and gastrointestinal illness

Galway, L., Allen, D., Parkes, M., Li, L. & Takaro, T. 
Hydroclimatic variables and acute gastrointestinal illness in
British Columbia, Canada: a time series analysis. Water Res.
Res. 51, 885–895.
Gasparrini, A. & Leone, M.  Attributable risk from distributed
lag models. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 14, 55.
Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B. & Kenward, M. G.  Distributed
lag non-linear models. Stat. Med. 29, 2224–2234.
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Schuster-Wallace, C. J., Berke, O. &
McEwen, S. A.  Weather, water quality and infectious
gastrointestinal illness in two Inuit communities in
Nunatsiavut, Canada: potential implications for climate
change. Ecohealth 8, 93–108.
Health Canada  Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water
Quality: Guideline Technical Document – Enteric Protozoa:
Giardia and Cryptosporidium. Water, Air and Climate
Change Bureau, Healthy Environments and Consumer
Safety Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
International Panel on Climate Change  Climate Change 2013:
The Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, New York,
USA.
Kistemann, T., Classen, T., Koch, C., Dangendorf, F., Fischeder, R.,
Gebel, J., Vacata, V. & Exner, M.  Microbial load of
drinking water reservoir tributaries during extreme rainfall
and runoff. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 2188–2197.
Lake, I., Bentham, G., Kovats, R. & Nichols, G.  Effects of
weather and river ﬂow on cryptosporidiosis. J. Water Health
3, 469–474.
Lal, A., Baker, M. G., Hales, S. & French, N. P.  Potential
effects of global environmental changes on cryptosporidiosis
and giardiasis transmission. Trends Parasitol. 29, 83–90.
Levy, K., Woster, A. P., Goldstein, R. S. & Carlton, E. J. 
Untangling the impacts of climate change on waterborne
diseases: a systematic review of relationships between
diarrheal diseases and temperature, rainfall, ﬂooding, and
drought. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 4905–4922.
Majowicz, S. E., Edge, V. L., Fazil, A., McNab, W. B., Dore, K. A.,
Sockett, P. N., Flint, J. A., Middleton, D., McEwen, S. A. &

Journal of Water and Health

|

15.6

|

2017

Wilson, J. B.  Estimating the under-reporting rate for
infectious gastrointestinal illness in Ontario. Can. J. Public
Health 96, 178–181. doi:10.17269/cjph.96.612
McKenney, D. W., Hutchinson, M. F., Papadopol, P., Lawrence,
K., Pedlar, J., Campbell, K., Milewska, E., Hopkinson, R. F.,
Price, D. & Owen, T.  Customized spatial climate models
for North America. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 92, 1611–1622.
Metro Vancouver  Our Drinking Water Source. http://www.
metrovancouver.org/services/water/sources-supply/
drinking-water/Pages/default.aspx (accessed 22 April 2016).
Paciﬁc Climate Impacts Consortium  Statistically Downscaled
Climate Scenarios. http://tools.paciﬁcclimate.org/dataportal/
downscaled_gcms/map/ (accessed 12 January 2015).
R Core Team  R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria. http://www.r-project.org/.
Schuster, C. J., Ellis, A. G., Robertson, W. J., Charron, D. F.,
Aramini, J. J., Marshall, B. J. & Medeiros, D. T. 
Infectious disease outbreaks related to drinking water in
Canada, 1974–2001. Can. J. Public Health 96, 254–258.
doi:10.17269/cjph.96.634
Schwartz, J., Levin, R. & Goldstein, R.  Drinking water
turbidity and gastrointestinal illness in the elderly of
Philadelphia. J. Epidemiol. Commun. Health 54, 45–51.
Semenza, J. C., Herbst, S., Rechenburg, A., Suk, J. E., Hoser, C.,
Schreiber, C. & Kistemann, T.  Climate change impact
assessment of food- and waterborne diseases. Crit. Rev.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 42, 857–890.
Skelton, C.  Interactive Map Shows Metro Vancouver
Commuting Patterns. http://vancouversun.com/news/staffblogs/interactive-map-shows-metro-vancouver-commutingpatterns (accessed 28 June 2016).
Thomas, K. M., Charron, D. F., Waltner-Toews, D., Schuster, C.,
Maarouf, A. R. & Holt, J. D.  A role of high impact
weather events in waterborne disease outbreaks in Canada,
1975–2001. Int. J. Environ. Health Res. 16, 167–180.
Uejio, C. K., Yale, S. H., Malecki, K., Borchardt, M. A., Anderson,
H. A. & Patz, J. A.  Drinking water systems, hydrology,
and childhood gastrointestinal illness in Central and
Northern Wisconsin. Am. J. Public Health 104, 639–646.

First received 2 May 2017; accepted in revised form 2 July 2017. Available online 2 September 2017

