The Health Effects of Swimming at
Sydney Beaches

_~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~!
.
~~~

I'll'm

-K:e'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.I

Stephen J. Corbett, MRCGP, MPH, FAFPHM, George L. Rubin, FRACP,
FAFPHM, Gregory K Cury, BAppSc, MStats, David G. Kleinbaun, PhD,
and the Sydney Beach Users Study Advisory Group

Inaodcion
The disposal of human sewage
through ocean outfalls adjacent to recreational bathing areas and, before that, into
Sydney Harbour has been a contentious
issue since the earlyyears of the colony in
New South Wales.' Apart from the aesthetic objections, there is a long-standing
concem that bathing in polluted waters
poses a risk to the health of the estimated
3 million people who use these beaches
annually.2
Seventy percent of Sydney's sewage
is discharged through three ocean outfalls
at North Head, Bondi, and Malabar. Each
outfall releases primary treated sewage
into coastal waters, 150 to 650 ML per day
in dryweather and 700 to 2400 MLper day
in wet weather.3 The sewage system is
designed to overflow into the storm-water
system at times of high rainfall to cope
with this large increase in volume in wet
weather. Fecal contamination of swimming beaches can occur when the sewage
plume from these outfalls, under the influence of winds or currents, moves onto
the beach and via discharge from stormwater drains, many ofwhich discharge directly onto beaches.
Studies at ocean and freshwater sites
in the United States,4-6 Canada,7'8 Egypt,9
and Israel'0 have shown a variable relationship between gastrointestinal, respiratory, ear, and skin symptoms and indices
of sewage pollution of bathing water. The
results of these studies are not necessarily
applicable to Sydney's beaches because
of differences in dilutive factors, water
temperature, ocean currents, and method
of sewage treatment and their potential effects on the survival of pathogenic organisms" in bathing waters.

In the summer of 1989, the New
South Wales Health Department released
the results of a survey of bathing water
quality that showed that one third of all
samples tested at many popular Sydney
beaches failed to meet existingwater quality criteria.12 A wave of media and community protest followed. Bodies such as
the Australian Surf Lifesaving Association, whose members are the very icons of
Australian beach culture, added their
voices to the call for an urgent review of
bathing water quality in Sydney. Physicians practicing in beachside suburbs reported an increase in the incidence of ear
infections, gastroenteritis, and other viral
illnesses that could be attributed to ocean
bathing.'3 The desertion of beaches that
followed these reports had major economic implications for local businesses
and for Sydney's reputation as an international tourist destination. Against this
background the Sydney Beach Users
Study was commissioned, with a brief
to investigate the relationship between
ocean swimming at Sydney's beaches and
illness. An advisory committee comprising representatives from the state government and consumer groups was formed to
oversee the planning and execution of the
Stephen J. Corbett, George L. Rubin, and
Gregory K. Curry are with the Epidemiology
and Health Services Evaluation Branch, New
South Wales Health Department, Sydney,
Australia. David G. Kleinbaum is with the Division of Epidemiology, Emory University
School of Public Health, Atlanta, Ga. For a list
of the members of the Sydney Beach Users
Advisory Group, see the Acknowledgments.
Requests for reprints should be sent to
Stephen J. Corbett, MRCGP, MPH, FAFPHM,
Epidemiology Branch, New South Wales
Health Department, Locked Mail Bag 961,
North Sydney 2059, NSW Australia.
This paper was accepted May 18, 1993.

American Journal of Public Health 1701



Corbett et aL

which interviews were conducted. Health
department surveyors collected morning
and afternoon samples on each day from
sites approximately at the midpoint of
each sector of the beach. As nearly as
could practicably be achieved, interviewing of respondents at selected beaches
was done in the period in which water
samples were taken. A standard protocol
for the collection of 250 mL of water at
a depth of 30 to 45 cm was used. Samples were refrigerated at 4°C and transported for analysis at the Division of
Analytical Laboratories of the New
South Wales Health Department. Recommended standard methods were used
to count fecal coliformsI4,15 and fecal

streptococci.16

study. This paper reports the results of
this epidemiological study.

Mehods
Subjects
Subjects for this cohort study were
selected from persons attending 12 designated Sydney beaches on a total of 41
sampling days including weekends, public
holidays, and one randomly selected
weekday between December 5, 1989, and
February 26, 1990. We selected the 12
most popular beaches in the metropolitan
area, as assessed by the Surf Lifesaving
Association, to recruit subjects.
On each of the study days, beachgoers at 6 of the 12 beaches were approached
to obtain consent to participate in the
study. The 6 beaches selected on any day
included 2 each from the northern, eastern, and southern areas. We used a quota
sampling technique for selection of subjects at individual beaches, setting equal
quotas for each beach on each sampling
day. Each beach was divided into three
sectors, defined by the position of the
swimming area flags erected by the lifesavers (lifeguards). The allotted quota for
the beach was divided equally among the
three sectors. Trained interviewers recruited subjects, starting at the center of
each sector and moving in a clockwise
fashion until the quota for that sector had
been reached. To minimize the inclusion
in the study of family or social groups, we
specified that potential subjects be at least
3 m apart.
To quality for inclusion, a respondent
had to be 15 years old or older and had to
agree to both an initial beach interview
and a follow-up telephone interview. We
excluded children younger than 15 years
1702 American Journal of Public Health

of age because ofthe problems involved in
obtaining consent from minors for biomedical research. At the beach interview
the interviewer introduced the respondent
to the survey, collected basic demographic data, and asked whether the respondent had swum anywhere in the previous 5 days or had any condition that
precluded swimming on the day of the
interview.
Subjects were excluded from the
study if they reported having been swimming in the 5 days prior to the beach interview or having an illness that prevented
them from swimming on the interview day.
Interviewers telephoned study participants 7 to 10 days after the initial interview to elicit details of symptoms of
illness in the previous week, attendance at
a doctor's office, absence from work, and
whether the subject had been swimmnig at
any time between the initial and follow-up
interviews. Respondents were asked
whether they had experienced vomiting;
diarrhea; cough, cold, fever, or symptoms
suggestive of flu; or ear or eye infections
since the day of the beach interview.
Field interviewing, clerical checking,
data entry, and initial computer editing
were performed by AGB McNair, a division of AGB Research Australia Pty Ltd
under contract to the New South Wales
Health Department.

Exposure Assessment
We defined swinmmg as immersion
of the face and head in water. At follow-up
the interviewer asked whether the subject
had swum on the day of the beach interview and asked the subject to estimate the
amount of time spent in the water.
Water samples were taken on the
same days and at the same beaches on

We defined fecal contamination of
beachwater as low if there was compliance with the current New South Wales
Department of Health standard-geometric mean coliform count not exceeding 300 colony-forming units per 100 mL
and no single sample exceeding 2000 colony-forming units per 100 mL-and high if
these levels were exceeded.

Statistical Methods
We used the Statistical Analysis
System (SAS)17 for tabulations and subsequent statistical modeling. Unconditional logistic regression, using both the
CATMOD procedure in SAS (Version
6.03) and the MULTLR program, was
used to model the main effects and covariates on the probability of reporting
symptoms.'8 Point and interval estimates
in the presence of interaction were performed according to the methods of Klein-

baum et al.'9
We assessed the health effects of
swimning in polluted water by fitting a
series of logistic regression models to the
data to adjust-for age, sex, and a history
of subsequent swimning-estimates of
odds of reporting specific symptoms in
swimners compared with nonswimmers.
Two variables denoted exposure to polluted water in these models: swinmming
duration and a measure of bacterial count
in the water. The bacterial count was derived from the geometric or arithmetic
mean organism count or from the maximum organism count of all water samples
collected on that beach on the day of the
beach interview.
These logistic regression models
were fitted separately for each outcome,
that is, (1) any reported symptoms, (2) respiratory symptoms, (3) fever, (4) eye
symptoms, (5) ear symptoms, and (6) gastrointestinal symptoms.
December 1993, Vol. 83, No. 12



Beach Users

Red&s
Water Sampling
Of 482 individual water samples
tested, 461 yielded usable results. Of
these, 67 (14.5%) failed to meet the water
quality criteria set by the New South
Wales Department of Health. Summary
results of water testing for both fecal contamination indices measured, coliforms
and fecal streptococci, are presented in
Table 1. There was a strong correlation
between a "pass" on the morning test and
a "pass" in the afternoon test. (A water
sample was categorized as a "pass" if the
geometric mean fecal coliform count was
below 300 colony-forming units per 100
mL.) On days when the water failed the
moming test, there was a 50%o chance of
its also failing the aftemoon test.

Eposure and Reported Symptomn
Of the 9650 persons who were approached on the selected beaches, 8413
(87.2%) agreed to participate. Of these, we
excluded 325 (3.9%1o) because they had illnesses that prevented them from swimming on that day and 4099 (48.7%) because they reported that they had been
swimmng in the previous 5 days. Of the
remaining 3989 persons, we were able to
contact 2968 (74.4%) by telephone for a
follow-up interview. Young males were
the most likely not to respond at the follow-up interview. The age and sex of
those refusing to participate, those excluded because of prior swimming or illness, and those enrolled in the study were
sinilar (Table 2).
We excluded 12 subjects from the
analysis because of missing age and sex
data and a further 117 subjects because of
missing data on pollution levels on the day
of beach interview. This left 2839 subjects
available for analysis. Of this group, 915
(32.2%) reported that they had not swum
on the day of the beach interview. Only
303 (10.7%) of the subjects swam on days
on which high pollution levels were recorded.
A total of 683 subjects (24.0%) reported experiencing symptoms in the previousweek; ofthese, 435 (63.7%) reported
respiratory symptoms. The prevalence of
reported fever and respiratory, eye, ear,
and other symptoms increased with increasing bacterial counts measured on the
day of initial interview. Gastrointestinal
symptoms, which were reported by 4.1%
of the subjects, did not increase with increasing counts offecal bacteria (Table 3).
The prevalence of respiratory symptoms in young people aged 15 through 25
December 1993, Vol. 83, No. 12

years was high, irrespective of swimuing
status orpollution level. Only in older people did the incidence of respiratory symptoms rise with increasing levels of pollution. The prevalence of other reported
symptoms did not vary significantly
across age groups (Table 4).
Swimmers were almost twice as
likely as nonswimmers to report symptoms (odds ratio [OR] = 1.9; 95% confidence interval [CII = 1.4, 2.4), after adjustments were made for age and sex.
Symptoms were reported less frequently

by people who swam between the original
and follow-up interviews (Table 5). There
was no evidence that swimmers were deterred from entering the water because it
was or appeared to be contaminated.
We assessed the effect of increasing
pollution levels by comparing the estimated odds ratios at different levels of pollution for swimmers vs nonswimmers. As
the counts of fecal bacteria measured on
the day of original interview rose, swimmers were more likely to report all symptoms except gastrointestinal symptoms
American Journal of Public Health 1703



Corbett et aL

(Table 6). We plotted the estimated odds
ratios of swimmers' reporting symptoms
(within the group of swimmers only, using
the lowest pollution level as the reference
group) against pollution level (Figure 1).
The linear relationship between pollution
level and the odds of reporting symptoms
can be expressed mathematically by the
formula OR 1 + 0.0000921 In (Geometric Mean Coliform Count).
Substituting the arithmetic mean for
the geometric mean coliform count in the
logistic model slightly improved the fit of
this model to the data (X2 2.18,
P < .25). Counts of fecal streptococci
were worse predictors of the odds of reporting symptoms than were counts of fecal coliforms.
We assessed the effect of swimming
duration on health by comparing information on those who swam for less than 30
minutes and those who swam for more
than 30 minutes, but only in those subjects
who did not swim between interviews.
Those who swam for longer than 30 minutes were 4.6 times more likely to develop
gastrointestinal symptoms than were nonswimmers or those who swam for less
than 30 minutes (Table 7).
=

=

Dwusion

The cohort design used in this study
adaptation of that used in similar
studies in other countries.6-9 The design
has the explicit aim of isolating exposure
to a particular day so that the measurements of beach pollution on that day can

is

1704 American Journal of Public Health

an

December 1993, Vol. 83, No. 12



Beach Usen
be used as a proxy measure of the dose of
potentially pathogenic microorganisms.
We attempted to improve on this design
by increasing the frequency of pollution
measurement on study days and by including data on swimming duration in the
follow-up questionnaire. The exclusion of
children, done primarily for ethical reasons, reduces reporter bias but limits the
applicability of our results to people
younger than 15 years.
There are at least two explanations
for the lower prevalence of reported
symptoms in those who swam between
interviews. In some people, illness may
have prevented swimming between the
day of the original interview and the follow-up call. Conversely, those people
who did swim subsequently may have included regular swimmers who have some
immunity to pathogenic microorganisms
in ocean water.
Our results provide evidence that the
risk of swimming-related illness increases
with increasing pollution levels. The estimates of the magnitude of the slope of the
relationship between pollution levels and
all symptoms are similar to those obtained
elsewhere.8 The assumption of a linear relationship between illness and pollution
levels may have overestimated the risk of
illness at lower pollution levels. If a minimum infective dose of microorganisms
acquired while swimming is required to
cause illness then we should see a threshold pollution level below which illness did
not occur. Our data suggest that such a
threshold may in fact be present (see Figure 1).
The increases in risk of respiratory,
ear, and eye symptoms accountwholly for
the increases in illness observed. Enteroviruses, the commonest viruses present in
sewage effluent, can cause respiratory
symptoms.20 They also persist in marine
sediments and water for many months.21
In a pilot study of viruses and pathogenic
bacteria in waters at two Sydney beaches,22 2 of 10 samples taken from bathing
areas contained enteroviruses; both vaccine-strain polioviruses. However, enteroviruses were isolated in 63% of samples collected from sewage effluent or the
sewage plume. All counts of fecal indicator organisms in bathing areas in this study
were below the current New South Wales
standard, and it may therefore have underestimated the numbers of viruses present in polluted conditions.
Over the 41 days of data collection
the beaches were cleaner than usual,
thereby limiting the precision of our estimates of the odds of pollution-related
December 1993, Vol. 83, No. 12

OR= I + 0.0000921(geometdlc mean coiform count)

Odds Rato

1.5
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

0.

0

0

0

1

3

2

4

Geometric Mean Coliform Count (Thousands)
* Point Estimates

Note. ORs are adjusted for age, sex, and swimming duration; swimmers in water with 10
colony-forming units of fecal coliforns per 100 mL were the reerece category.
s by g ric
FIGURE 1-Odds rato (OR) of swimners' reporting health

L

mean coliform count, Syd

symptoms at high levels of pollution. Of
thewater samples tested in our study, 14%
exceeded the current New South Wales
standard. Daily surveillance of ocean water quality at seven Sydney beaches between 1983 and 19873 showed that five of
these beaches exceeded the current standard on more than 30%o of occasions in dry
weather. In wet weather, six beaches
failed more than 50%o of the tests.
Our data do not support the contention that minor barotrauma associated
with surf swimming is the cause of an increase in reported respiratory symptoms
in bathers. If this were true, we would
expect an increase in reported respiratory
symptoms with increasing swimming duration. We found no such increase.

Beach Use

Shtdy, 1989/90.

Reported gastrointestinal symptoms
showed no increase with increasing pollution levels. The prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms (4.1%) was similar to
that reported in other studies.6-9 A doseresponse relationship between indices of
bacterial pollution and gastrointestinal
symptoms has been an inconsistent finding and has been most clearly demonstrated in children, who were excluded
from our study. Some of these studies did
not fully adjust for confounders such as
age and reporter and interviewer bias, and
they may have overestimated the magnitude of the dose-response effect23 In the
study design we used self-reporting of
symptoms and exclusion of children to
miinimiz reporter bias. We did not use

American Journal of Public Health 1705



Corbett et aL

any clinical confirmation of reported
symptoms. Measurement error of this
kind would be nondifferential and would
therefore bias our estimate toward not
showing an effect. There was some evidence of an increase in risk of reporting
gastrointestinal illness with increased
swining duration. Swimming duration
may be a proxy measure of the volume of
ingested seawater, which may directly
cause symptoms.
The results of this study suggest that,
at Sydney's beaches, fecal coliforms are
marginally better predictors of reported
symptoms than fecal streptococci. These
results are at odds with other studies in
which fecal coliforms have been poorer
predictors of adverse health outcomes
than either streptococci or staphylococci.
This discrepancy may be explained by the
different relative survival of these microorganisms in effluent that is not chlorinated and in oceans that are warmer than
those around North America.
A technical issue prominent in the
public debate on ocean water quality was
the choice of an appropriate summar
measure of water quality. Bacterial counts
in water samples are inherently variable
and concurrent samples from the same
site can differ by orders of magnitude. The
geometric mean of serial measurements is
traditionally used as a summary index of
pollution. Criticism of the use of a geometric mean of bacterial counts has focused on the apparent "leveling" of the
data, therebyunderstandingthe true level
of pollution. Furthermore, use of the geometric mean count rather than, say, the
arithmetic mean or the daily maxmum
may introduce bias.24
To address these concerns we substituted the arithmetic mean and the daily
maximum for the geometric mean coliform in the logistic models. There was a
small improvement in the fit of the data
when the arithmetic mean was used, and
this summary measure is therefore preferable. It also has the advantage of being
more easily comprehended by the public.
In conclusion, we found a consistent
increase in reported illness with increasing
pollution levels of all symptom categories
except gastrointestinal symptoms. This
dose-response relationship provides a
quantitative basis for developing a healthbased standard for ocean water quality on
Sydney's beaches. 0

1706 American Journal of Public Health

Acknowledgments
The Sydney Beach Users Study Advisory
Group consisted of (in alphabetical order) Mr
Paul Albertini, New South Wales Surf Lifesaving Association; Dr Syd Bell, Eastern Sydney
Area Health Service; Mr Andrew Bernard, Division of Analytical Laboratories, New South
Wales Department of Health; Dr Charles
Bridges-Webb, Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners; Dr David Campbell,
Northern Sydney Area Health Service; Mr
Ernie Davis, New South Wales Surf Lifesaving
Association; Ms Nancy Esler, Senior Policy
Adviser to the Minister for the Environment;
Dr Julian Gold, Eastern Sydney Area Health
Service; Mr Richard Gosden, Greenpeace Australia Ltd; Dr Roderick Kennedy, Central
Coast Area Health Service; Dr Peter Macdonald and Dr Colin MacLeod, Central Sydney
Area Health Service; Dr Paul Morad, New
South Wales Surf Lifesaving Association; Dr
Aileen Plant, University of Sydney; Dr Robert
Reznik, Central Sydney Area Health Service;
Dr Louise Rushworth, Epidemiology and
Health Services Evaluation Branch, New
South Wales Department of Health; Dr Greg
Stewart, Southern Sydney Area Health Service; and Dr David Wilcox, Metropolitan Water, Sewage, and Drainage Board.

References
1. Bede S. Tadc Fish and Sewer Surfing.
Sydney, NSW, Australia: Allen & Unwin;
1989.
2. Report to the Sydney Beach Users Study
Group. New South Wales Surf Lifesaving
Association, Sydney, NSW, Australia:
1989.
3. Camp, Dresser and McKee International.
Review of Sydney's Beach Protection Programme: Report to the New South Wales
Minister for the Environment. Sydney,
NSW, Australia: NSW Minister for the Environment; 1989.
4. Cabelli VJ, Dufour AP, McCabe UJ, et al.
Swimming-associated gastroenteritis and
water quality. Am J EpidenioL 1982;115:
606.
5. Cabelli VJ, Dufour AP, Levin MA, et al.
Relationship of microbial indicators to
health effects at marine bathing beaches.
Am JPublic Health 1979;69:690-694.
6. Ocean Health St*d:A Study of the Relationship betwee Ilness and Ocean Beach
Water Qya in New Jersey. Trenton, NJ:
New Jersey Department of Health, Division of Occupational and Environmental
Health; September 1990.
7. Seyfried PL, Tobin RS, Brown NE, et al.
A prospective study of swimming-related
illness, I. swimming-assocated health risk.
Am JPublic Health 1985;75:1068-1070.
8. Seyfried PL, Tobin RS, Brown NE, et al.
A prospective study of swimming-related
illness, II. morbidity and microbiological

qualityofwater.AmJPublIcHea1th. 1985;
75:1071-1074.
9. El Sharkawi F. The pollution of the
beaches of Alexandria due to the discharge

of sewage: a case study. Water Sci TechnoL 1986;18:273-278.
10. Fattal B, Peleg-Olevsky E, Agursky T, et
al. The association between seawater pollution as measured by bacterial indicators
and morbidity among bathers at Mediterranean bathing beaches of Israel. Chemosphere. 1987;16(Z/3):565-570.
11. Dufour AP. Bacterial indicators of recreational water quality. Can JPublic Healt
1984;75:49-56.
12. Bernard AG. The bacteriological quality of
tidal bathing waters in Sydney. Water Sci
TechnoL 1989;21:65-69.
13. MealyE, CraigO. Beachside doctors tellof
surf victms. Sydney Sun-Herakd March
1989:15.
14. Rose RE, Geldreich EE, Utsky W. Proceedig ofa Sympos*wn on the Recovery
of Indicator Oanism Employg Membrane Filers. Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency; 1977:101-105.
EPA 600/9-77-024.
15. American Waterworks Association and
Water Poution Control Cowncil Stndard
Methodsfor the Ebxamntionof Waterand
Waste Water. 17th ed. Washington, DC:
American Public Health Association; 1989.
16. Methodsforthe &amination of Water and
Air: Mirobiological Fxamination of Water
by Membrane Filtration Sydney, Australia: Standards Association of Australia;
1981. Australian Standard 1095.4.1.8.
17. SAS/Stat Guide for Personal Computne,
Version 6. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc;
1987.
18. Campos FN, Franco EL. A micro-computer program for multiple logistic regression by unconditional and conditional maximum likelihood methods.AmJEpidemiot

1989;129:439-444.
19. Kleinbaum DG, Kupper LL, Morgenstern
H. Epiemiogical Research Princiles
and Quantitative Methods. New York,
NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold; 1982:477491.
20. Melnick JL, Wenner HA, Phillips JL. Enterviruses. In: Lennette EH, Schmidt NJ,
eds.DiagnosticProedure Vra4 Rickettsia4 and Chlamydial Infections. Washinon, DC: American Public Health Association; 1979:471-534.
21. Goyal SM, Adams WA, O'Malley MA,
Lear DW. Human pathogenic viruses at
sewage sludge disposal sites in the Middle
Atlantic Region. Appl Environ MicrobioL

1984;48:758-763.
22. Kueh CSW, Grohmann GS. Recovery of
viruses and bacteria in waters off Bondi
Beach: a pilot study. MedJAust. 1989;151:
632-638.
23. Lightfoot NE. A Prospective Study of
SwimmingRelated Illness at SixFmshwater Beaches in Southern Ontano. Thesis.
24. Seixas NH, Robins TG, Moulton LH. The
use of geometric and arithmetic mean exposures in occupational epidemiology.Am
JInd Med. 1988;14:465-477.

December 1993, Vol. 83, No. 12

