Research
Meeting Report: Knowledge and Gaps in Developing Microbial Criteria
for Inland Recreational Waters
Samuel Dorevitch,1 Nicholas J. Ashbolt,2 Christobel M. Ferguson,3,4 Roger Fujioka,5 Charles D. McGee,6
Jeffrey A. Soller,7 and Richard L. Whitman 8
1University

of Illinois at Chicago School of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois, USA; 2Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA; 3Ecowise Environmental, Penrith, New South Wales, Australia; 4Australian National University,
Canberra, Australian Capitol Territory, Australia; 5University of Hawaii, Water Resources Research Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA;
6Orange County Sanitation District, Fountain Valley, California, USA; 7Soller Environmental, Berkeley, California, USA; 8U.S. Geological
Survey, Lake Michigan Ecological Research Station, Porter, Indiana, USA

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has committed to issuing in 2012 new or
revised criteria designed to protect the health of those who use surface waters for recreation. For
this purpose, the U.S. EPA has been conducting epidemiologic studies to establish relationships
between microbial measures of water quality and adverse health outcomes among swimmers. New
methods for testing water quality that would provide same-day results will likely be elements of
the new criteria. Although the epidemiologic studies upon which the criteria will be based were
conducted at Great Lakes and marine beaches, the new water quality criteria may be extended to
inland waters (IWs). Similarities and important differences between coastal waters (CWs) and IWs
that should be considered when developing criteria for IWs were the focus of an expert workshop.
Here, we summarize the state of knowledge and research needed to base IWs microbial criteria on
sound science. Two key differences between CWs and IWs are the sources of indicator bacteria,
which may modify the relationship between indicator microbes and health risk, and the relationship between indicators and pathogens, which also may vary within IWs. Monitoring using rapid
molecular methods will require the standardization and simplification of analytical methods, as
well as greater clarity about their interpretation. Research needs for the short term and longer term
are described.
Key words: Clean Water Act, environmental epidemiology, environmental microbiology, indicator bacteria, inland waters, predictive modeling, waterborne pathogens, water recreation. Environ
Health Perspect 118:871–876 (2010). doi:10.1289/ehp.0901627 [Online 25 January 2010]

Recreational Water Quality
Criteria

Ambient water quality criteria. Viral,
­b acterial, and protozoan pathogens are
responsible for infectious disease outbreaks
among recreators at coastal and inland surface waters (Yoder et al. 2008). To protect the
public from recreational waterborne illness,
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) established ambient water quality criteria (AWQC; U.S. EPA 1986). The epidemiologic studies on which the current AWQC are
based suggest that at freshwater beaches, the
rate of acute gastrointestinal illness attributable to swimming should be about 8 cases
per 1,000 swimmers when monthly geometric mean (GM) density (concentration)
of Escherichia coli is < 126 colony-forming
units (CFU)/100 mL), or if the monthly GM
density of enterococci is < 33 CFU/100 mL
(EPA 1984). For marine waters, the gastrointestinal illness rate should be about 19 per
1,000 swimmers when monthly GM enterococci densities do not exceed 35 CFU/100 mL
(U.S. EPA 1983). Additionally, single-sample
maximum values were established to aid in
day-to-day beach management. For freshwater
beaches, these maxima are 235 CFU/100 mL
for E. coli or 61 CFU/100 mL for enterococci;
for marine beaches, the single sample maximum for enterococci is 104 CFU/100 mL.
Environmental Health Perspectives •

volume

Nonetheless, final implementation guidelines for the 1986 AWQC were never issued,
and prior to the passage of the Beaches
Environmental Assessment and Coastal
Health Act (BEACH Act 2000), only 11 states
applied the criteria to their marine or Great
Lakes recreational waters [herein referred to
collectively as coastal waters (CWs)] (U.S.
EPA 2006).
Indicators and their limitations. Fecal
indicator bacteria (FIB), such as enterococci
and E. coli, are measured because they are
thought to indicate the presence of fecal
matter, and potentially pathogens, in surface waters. Compared with the pathogens
that cause recreational waterborne infections,
FIB are easier to detect and enumerate using
well-established and inexpensive methods.
Epidemiologic studies support the use of FIB
as predictors of illness rates among swimmers
(Wade et al. 2003).
Culture techniques for FIB require a minimum of 18–24 hr to perform. Thus, beach
managers evaluate information that is, at best,
1 day old when deciding to issue swimming
bans or advisories. By the time FIB results
become available, the microbial water quality may have changed substantially (Boehm
2007; Hou et al. 2006; Whitman et al. 2004).
Illness rates at beaches that are impacted by
human sewage are related to FIB, which are

118 | number 6 | June 2010

measured by culture (U.S. EPA 1983, 1984)
or by rapid molecular methods (Wade et al.
2006, 2008), but at beaches without point
sources of human fecal pollution, this may
not be true (Calderon et al. 1991; Colford
et al. 2007). If the environmental sources and
persistence of FIB were similar to those of
pathogens, FIB should be good predictors
of human illness. However, FIB may persist or even regrow in soil, plants, sand, and
sediments (Byappanahalli and Fujioka 2004;
Byappanahalli et al. 2006; Davies et al. 1995;
Desmarais et al. 2002)—environments that,
without a suitable host organism, do not support the replication of human viral or protozoan pathogens. Boehm et al. (2009) recently
reviewed these and other limitations of FIB as
indicators.
Inland water recreation, risk, and regulation. Inland flowing (riverine) waters are
surface waters with a net directional current
and are confined by banks and stream beds.
Lacustrine waters are freshwater bodies generally confined to a basin (lakes). According to
the U.S. EPA ATTAINS database (2009),
the United States has > 3.5 million miles of
inland flowing waters and more than 41 million acres of inland waters (IWs).
The 1986 AWQC were based almost
entirely on epidemiologic studies conducted
at coastal beaches, with a small portion of
Address correspondence to S. Dorevitch, UIC
School of Public Health, 2121 W. Taylor, M/C 923,
Chicago, IL 60612 USA. Telephone: (312) 355-3629.
Fax: (312) 413-9898. E-mail: sdorevit@uic.edu
We acknowledge all workshop participants for
their efforts. Many thanks to S. Briggs, Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, for her comments. We acknowledge the Water Environment
Research Foundation (WERF) and the U.S. EPA for
organizing the expert workshop.
R.L.W.: Contribution 1583 of the U.S. Geological
Survey Great Lakes Science Center.
This manuscript has been reviewed by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and by the
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). The views expressed
by the authors are not necessarily policy nor the
views of U.S. EPA or the USGS.
S.D. currently receives research support from the
WERF and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago. J.A.S. is employed by
Soller Environmental, Berkeley, CA. The remaining
authors declare they have no actual or potential competing financial interests.
Received 26 October 2009; accepted 25 January
2010.

871



Dorevitch et al.

data coming from Keystone Lake, Oklahoma
(U.S. EPA 1983, 1984). None of the supporting data were collected at rivers. Additionally,
European IW recreation research is limited by
the use of unique settings (Fewtrell et al. 1992;
Lee et al. 1997), limited groups of participants
(van Asperen et al. 1998), limited water quality measures (Ferley et al. 1989), and abbreviated reporting of illness rates (Fewtrell et al.
1994). European trials of randomized exposure to IWs have been conducted as part of
the Epibathe study (European Commission
2010; Wiedenmann et al. 2006). However,
the exposure, three head immersions over a
10-min period, is different from actual swimming; thus, extrapolating findings to other
contexts is difficult.
The BEACH Act (2000) mandated that
the 1986 criteria be applied to all U.S. marine
and Great Lakes CWs, but the mandate was
not extended to IWs. This Act also required
that the U.S. EPA conduct epidemiologic
studies at beaches to develop information for
issuing new or revised criteria. As a result, the
National Epidemiological and Environmental
Assessment of Recreational Water (NEEAR)
study (Wade 2006, 2008) has been conducted at marine and Great Lakes beaches.
To address the BEACH Act requirement
that the U.S. EPA develop more timely indicators of water quality, the NEEAR study
used quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) tests for FIB that could produce
same-day results.
In 2006, the U.S. EPA was sued by the
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
and others for failing to meet BEACH Act
research and regulatory deadlines for recreational waters. In August 2008, the U.S. EPA
entered into a consent decree (NRDC/EPA
2008), which mandated that new or revised
criteria be issued by 15 October 2012. The
consent decree required that the U.S. EPA
“[e]valuate the applicability of NEEAR Great
Lakes data to inland water.” Thus, a policy
imperative exists to consider establishing IW
AWQC, but the epidemiologic knowledge
base for criteria development is very limited.
Extending AWQC derived from studies conducted at coastal sites to IWs involves major
assumptions: a) similar densities of FIB reflect
a similar health risk in inland and coastal settings, presumably because they reflect a similar risk of exposure to pathogens of similar
infectivity and virulence; b) hydrogeochemical differences among inland lakes, rivers, and
CWs would be assumed to have nondifferential impacts on the transport and fate of
indicators and pathogens; and c) the criteria
derived from the studies conducted at sewageimpacted coastal beaches would be assumed
to protect against illness in inland settings,
where the dominant pollutant sources may be
wildlife and/or agricultural animals.

872

To assess these assumptions, and more
broadly, the state of the science that could
support the application of coastal-derived criteria to IWs, a 3-day workshop of 31 national
and international experts was convened in
February 2009 by the Water Environment
Research Foundation (WERF) with support
from the U.S. EPA. Workshop participants
identified critical knowledge gaps and outlined
research needs that could be met by December
2010 (the deadline for completing research
that will be reviewed in the development
of the 2012 criteria) or between 2010 and
2015 (for consideration in future AWQC).
A detailed report of workshop proceedings is
available online (Water Environment Research
Foundation 2009). In this meeting report the
chairs of the working groups and the editor
of the WERF report have summarized workshop highlights and added updates based on
­subsequent discussions.

CWs and IWs: Superficial
Similarities
General principles of hydrology, microbiology,
and public health should apply across all water
recreation settings. Surface waters, regardless
of matrix and geologic setting, are governed by
the same ecologic, hydrologic, and geographic
principles. Likewise, ingesting a specific quantity of a given viable pathogen in any surface
water should produce similar health risks.
Consistent with this notion, health risks associated with water recreation have been identified
at Great Lakes (U.S. EPA 1984; Wade et al.
2006, 2008) and U.S. marine settings (Colford
et al. 2007; U.S. EPA 1983) and with IWs
in Europe (Ferley et al. 1989; Wiedenmann
et al. 2006). If monitoring of FIB at inland
recreational waters was mandated, testing that
is currently conducted for other regulatory
purposes could, with sufficient resources, be
expanded. Thus, at first glance, it seems that
recreational criteria derived from CW studies
could be applied to and implemented for IW.
There are, however, important differences to
consider between IWs and CWs.

Important Differences between
CWs and IWs
Several critical differences exist between CWs
and IWs, which can be understood primarily as a function of the scale of water body of
interest. Scale here refers to the volume, surface area, related landscape, and the flow (for
flowing waters). Scale can influence watershed interactions, runoff, dilution, currents,
wave height, turbulence, resuspension, and
source complexity.
Differences in pathogen source. The ultimate determinants of health risks are thought
to be dependent on the dose and virulence of
pathogens ingested by recreators, not whether
the waters are categorized as coastal or inland.
volume

IWs are generally dominated by more rural
areas and agricultural land use and are thus
more likely to be affected by wildlife and
livestock than are coastal watersheds. Warmblooded animals have the potential to carry
a variety of human pathogenic bacteria and
protozoa and may pose human health risks
(Dorner et al. 2004). For example, Leptospira
in the urine of infected wildlife or livestock
can contaminate surface waters and infect
humans via skin breaks or by ingestion. U.S.
outbreaks of leptospirosis have occurred in
the context of IW limited- and full-contact
recreation (Jackson et al. 1993; Morgan et al.
2002; Yoder et al. 2008). A recent U.S. EPA
review identified several recreational outbreaks
tentatively linked to wildlife and livestock
sources, although definitive confirmations of
animal sources have been lacking (U.S. EPA
2009). With limited dilution in inland settings, bathers themselves can become sources
of fecal pathogens. Sporadic mild illness
(Calderon et al. 1991) and, more conclusively, numerous outbreaks of severe disease
including E. coli 0157:H7 (Bruce et al. 2003;
Keene et al. 1994; Yoder et al. 2008) have
been linked to other bathers at IWs.
The importance of sediment in IWs. Small
lakes and streams are closely associated with
watershed factors such as soils, runoff characteristics, shoreline processes, and meteorological events. Turbulent flow in IWs may lead
to resuspension of sediment-associated FIB.
Numerous studies have found that E. coli
and enterococci can persist and potentially
regrow in sediments and soils (Byappanahalli
and Fujioka 2004; Byappanahalli et al. 2006;
Davies et al. 1995; Desmarais et al. 2002).
Regrowth of FIB is suspected to occur at the
water/sediment boundary (Wheeler Alm et al.
2003; Yamahara et al. 2009). The effect of
sediment resuspension on FIB in IWs could
be amplified at the boundary layer, which,
compared with CW settings, is larger in relation to the volume of surface water. An area
of consensus among workshop participants is
that soil and sediments, which are thought to
contain proportionally fewer pathogens than
fecal sources, should make larger contributions to indicator densities in surface water
samples in IWs than in CW.
Differences in hydrogeology that change
indicator densities. The scale of each IW is
determined by climatic conditions, geology,
and ecology for that watershed. The sites for
land-based contamination of IW are many,
because waterborne pollutants enter IW from
multiple sites as it flows downstream. Because
the volumes of water in many IW sites are
relatively small and land-based pollutants
are often close to these sites, the dilution of
pollutants is more limited in streams than
in coastal settings (Olyphant et al. 2003).
Parameters such as flow and turbulence vary

118 | number 6 | June 2010 • Environmental Health Perspectives



Inland recreational waters—state of the science

substantially within the category of IWs and
could account for more variability in FIB levels in IWs than in CWs.
The decoupling of indicator and pathogen
densities in IWs. Human pathogenic viruses
and protozoan parasites reproduce in the cells
of their hosts, whereas as noted above, sediments can provide favorable conditions for
the persistence and re-growth of FIB. A concern among workshop participants was that
a decoupling (meaning a significantly weaker
association) of indicators and pathogens may
occur in IWs. The basis for this concern is the
combination of the known growth of FIB in
sediments and the influence that sediment
is thought to have on IW FIB. This decoupling is likely to result in different indicatorpathogen relationships at coastal and inland
systems, as well as differences across IWs
with varying hydrologic characteristics. As a
result of this decoupling, FIB may overestimate pathogen densities and expected illness
rates among IW recreators. In part because
of this putative decoupling, the application
of coastal-derived FIB criteria to inland settings should result in rates of sporadic illness
(although not necessarily outbreaks of severe
illness) that are at least as protective in IW as
they are in CW.

Challenges at Both
CWs and IWs
Rapid testing methods. Recent epidemiologic
studies have used quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) measurements
of enterococci (Colford et al. 2007; Wade
et al. 2006, 2008), and this method may be
endorsed in the new 2012 AWQC. Currently,
qPCR and other rapid methods of measuring FIB are in various stages of development
(Griffith et al. 2009; Noble and Weisberg
2005). If the necessary monitoring protocols
and communications systems were in place,
these methods could provide same-day water
quality information in IWs.
One broad concern with the qPCR
approach is method performance, meaning the precision, accuracy, sensitivity, and
interlaboratory variability. A second concern
is the interpretation of qPCR output to estimate health risks. In epidemiologic studies,
enterococci qPCR results are being directly
calibrated against rates of illness. That calibration is being performed at coastal beaches
impacted by treated human sewage. Humic
and fulvic acids found in sediment (CWs and
IWs) can inhibit PCR analyses (Rutjes et al.
2006; Tsai and Olson 1992). Because of the
importance of sediment in determining surface water quality in IWs, sediment may result
in more inhibition than occurs in CW. The
qPCR methods detect viable, nonviable, and
cell-free DNA of FIB, whereas conventional
methods detect culturable microbes only. The
Environmental Health Perspectives •

volume

distribution of these components of the qPCR
signal (Nocker et al. 2007) could be different
in IW compared with CW, particularly at
sites impacted by treated wastewater. IW pollutant sources and sediments may result in
qPCR-illness rate relationships that are different from those described (Wade et al. 2006,
2008) in CW.
Predictive modeling: opportunities and
uncertainties in CWs and IWs. Modeling
approaches offer alternatives to epidemiologic
studies or extensive microbial monitoring.
Simple regression modeling of FIB densities
use real-time information such as meteorological and physical parameters, such as turbidity, to produce a timely and, in the long-run,
a lower-cost alternative to micro­biological
monitoring (Boehm et al. 2007; Frick et al.
2008; Olyphant and Whitman 2004).
Regression models are used to issue beach
notification at three Great Lakes locations
and on the Schuylkill River (Philly RiverCast
2009). Mechanistic models, which make use
of microbial loading, dilution, decay, transport, and other parameters to predict location-specific densities of FIB (Boehm et al.
2005; Steets and Holden 2003), are probably
best used for evaluating management practices
in watersheds. These approaches model FIB
levels; it is unknown whether they predict
pathogen presence or illness rates.
The above approaches predict water quality, whereas quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) is used to predict health risks
in populations (Haas et al. 1999). The inputs
to QMRA models include readily obtainable
demographic and water quality data. Health
risks are predicted using estimates of pathogen
densities, water exposure, and dose response
(number of units of pathogens ingested as a
predictor of illness probability). Conversely, a
desired water quality target can be modeled to
meet a health risk target. QMRA allows evaluations of relative risks across a range of sitespecific contamination scenarios. Few studies
have directly compared QMRA projections
with epidemiologic observations (Ashbolt
et al. 1997), although the NEEAR study site
in Boqueron, Puerto Rico (http://www.epa.
gov/NHEERL/neear/) will prospectively collect information needed to compare modeled
(QMRA) and observed risk. Predictive models of water quality and QMRA can be only as
accurate as their inputs; some input data, such
as dose response, remain limited. Sensitivity
analyses can evaluate sources of uncertainty
in model estimates to allow prioritization of
additional data collection (such as spatiotemporal variability in indicators and pathogens).
Policy and implementation challenges. To
protect the public from waterborne illness at
IWs, criteria will have to be established based
on a targeted level of risk. In the absence of
stakeholder input, such a targeted risk could

118 | number 6 | June 2010

not yet be considered an acceptable risk. The
unadjusted rate of illness attributable to swimming at Great Lakes point source–impacted
bathing beaches appears to be about 20–25
cases of gastrointestinal illness per 1,000 swimmers (Wade et al. 2008). In addition to the
rate of illness, the severity of illness attributable
to water recreation is also an important consideration in characterizing risk. The U.S. epidemiologic studies (set in CW) have described
rates of gastrointestinal illness, generally
thought to be mild and self-limited. By contrast, reported disease outbreaks in IWs have
included rare but potentially life-threatening
infections, likely due to limited dilution and
proximity to fecal sources (including other
bathers). Once elements of acceptable risk,
rate, and severity have been defined, specific
values of FIB can be evaluated with a goal of
keeping risk below those levels.
AWQC developed to protect recreational
water users are applied to other Clean Water
Act (CWA) programs, such as the listing of
impaired waters and discharge limits (under
Section 303d of the CWA). A better understanding of wastewater treatment effects on
the components of the qPCR signal (viable
bacteria, nonviable bacteria, and cell-free
DNA) will help define the value of qPCR
monitoring for these other CWA purposes.
Translation factors or a refinement of qPCR
assays to identify viable cells (Nocker et al.
2007) may be needed to determine, for example, if treated wastewater effluent met discharge standards. The costs of implementing
qPCR requirements of new AWQC for both
CWs and IWs will be significant and could
result in the allocation of local funds away
from other water quality programs. Sameday measures of FIB have limited benefits
beyond beach notification. Continued use of
culture-based methods in those contexts is
reasonable. A potential advantage of qPCR is
the ability to differentiate human from nonhuman sources of FIB. Work published after
the workshop evaluated numerous promising approaches for both rapidly evaluating
microbe density and differentiating human
from nonhuman sources (Griffith et al.
2009). However, limitations of specific qPCR
approaches for differentiating sources has been
described (Stapleton et al. 2009).
New monitoring requirements for recreational waters may encompass the vast number of inland lakes and miles of rivers within
individual states. The application of predictive models, sanitary surveys, and QMRA to
develop site-specific standards, particularly
where the dominant source of fecal pollution
is nonhuman, is of interest to the regulated
community. It remains an open question
whether these alternatives to epidemiologic
studies would provide accurate and sufficiently
precise projections of FIB and health risk.

873



Dorevitch et al.

Critical Research Questions

the subject of epidemiologic studies but are a
potential concern. The possibility of zoonotic
waterborne viral infections should be investigated, as recent evidence supports possible
zoonotic origins of some human rotaviruses
(Banyai et al. 2009; Matthijnssens et al. 2009).
3. Molecular methods for water quality testing. Sediments, which likely contain
qPCR inhibitors, FIB (viable and nonviable),
and cell-free FIB DNA present a challenge
to IW monitoring. It is important to know
how insolation, water chemistry, wastewater
treatment, hydrologic parameters, season, and
water matrix differentially affect these components of the qPCR signal. Optimizing the
primers and probes, particularly those that
differentiate human from other sources, and
establishing procedures for minimizing naturally occurring PCR inhibitors are priorities.
4. Other approaches to predicting IW
recreation health risks. Procedures for optimizing and validating predictive models,
sanitary surveys, and QMRA approaches are
important for both coastal and IW. The U.S.
EPA Great Lakes survey tool (http://www.
epa.gov/waterscience/beaches/sanitarysurvey/)
should be modifiable for IW. For QMRA and
mechanistic models, inputs such as indicator
and pathogen concentrations, pathogen loading estimates, and health risks posed by various animal species are needed. An uncertainty
in estimating the health risk associated with
livestock is the high variability of protozoa
excretion rates (Ferguson et al. 2009).

Four groups of critical questions should be
answered regarding measures or models of
water quality as a means of assessing recreational
waterborne illness risk in IW (Appendix 1):
1. Microbial indicators as predictors
of pathogen exposure and health risks. To
advance our ability to model health risk, we
must characterize the transport, survival,
fate, and re-growth (for bacteria) of indicators and pathogens in flowing and nonflowing
IW. Persistence of pathogenic bacteria needs
to be better understood, as Campylobacter,
Salmonella, Shigella, and shigatoxin-producing
E. coli have been found on algae growing in
surface waters (Ishii et al. 2006). Similarly
E. coli O157:H7 can persist in sediments
(Bruce et al. 2003). Although the dynamics of FIB have been studied in some coastal
contexts (Boehm et al. 2002; Whitman and
Nevers 2004), FIB spatiotemporal variability
and its determinants need to be characterized
in hydrologically diverse IW.
2. Fecal pollution sources as predictors
of pathogen exposure and health risk. It is
important to determine if the source of fecal
pollution modifies the indicator-health association. The assumption that human fecal pollution presents the greatest health risk needs
further evaluation. Prior discussions, including
those at the workshop, focused on rates of illness seen among swimmers at beaches, generally mild and self-limited. Future work should
also consider illness severity, which may be
substantial if agricultural animals, wildlife,
or other bathers are sources of pathogens at
waters where dilution is limited. The health
risks to recreators at IW impacted by confined animal feeding operations have not been

An IW Research Agenda
To provide answers to the questions identified
in Appendix 1, short-term research (within
2 years) and longer-term projects (2–5 years)

are needed. These questions can be addressed
through targeted literature reviews, computer modeling, field sampling for environmental microbes, laboratory research on
analytic methods, and human health studies. Interdisciplinary studies would compile
sediment, soil, hydrology, microbiology, and
health data, all of which could be used to
identify predictors of health risk. Other than
epidemiologic and QMRA research, these
studies would not directly inform the establishment of AWQC but could advance water
quality modeling and our understanding of
sources of risk and uncertainty. Research
agenda elements are listed in Table 1. Limited
explanations of several items follow.
Short-term research. Molecular tests for
FIB. Rapid tests that are strongly correlated
with pathogen densities are needed to support the development of improved predictive
models of health risk. Pretreatment with propidium monoazide (PMA) may allow the differentiation of DNA from intact viable cells, as
opposed to extracellular DNA or DNA in cells
without a functioning membrane (Nocker et al.
2007). This PMA-qPCR approach has been
used to demon­strate a faster decay of the qPCR
signal of Bacteroidales compared with conventional qPCR (Bae and Wuertz 2009). PMA
pretreatment or other approaches for quantifying elements of the overall qPCR signal should
be evaluated for their ability to improve qPCR
predictions of pathogen presence.
Predictive modeling of health risk.
Comparison of retrospective QMRA analyses
with previously conducted epidemiologic studies could lead to revisions in QMRA model
assumptions and inputs to bring projected
levels of risk in line with risk ­levels observed

Table 1. Research to address critical IW criteria questions.

Critical questions
Determinants of indicatorpathogen relationships in IW
Sources of indicators,
pathogens, and health risk

Molecular methods in IW:
interpretation, standardization

Modeling health risk and
real-time water quality

Type of research required
Library computer
simulation
Laboratory
Field
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

Study overview
L: Advance mechanistic modeling of FIB and pathogens, supported by sampling of water, sediment
and soil in diverse IW. Repeated sampling to characterize the fate, transport, persistence, and
re-growth
S: Meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies to evaluate fecal pollutant source as a modifier of the
indicator–health risk relationship
S: Optimize and anchor QMRA models based on prior epidemiologic study results
S: Develop a sanitary survey tool for use in future IW epidemiologic and QMRA studies
S: Field sampling of feces from agricultural animals and wildlife to determine human pathogenic
potential and dynamics
L: Epidemiologic studies conducted at diverse IW sites, each with a different dominant source of
fecal pollution (agricultural animals, wildlife, urban runoff, wastewater)
S: Develop a database of relationships between rapid molecular-based and culture-based
measures of indicator microbes described in the literature
S: Characterize the persistence of specific molecular targets (human vs. other) in a variety of
environmental settings and wastewater, looking at viable and nonintact cells and cell-free DNA
S: Optimize, simplify, and standardize qPCR methods (particularly for source-specific markers) and
other rapid methods; use these in epidemiologic studies
L: Develop rapid methods for concentrating, identifying, and quantifying pathogens in recreational
waters
QMRA validation studies, S (retrospective) and L (prospective)
S: Measure real-time physicochemical, hydrologic, meteorologic parameters, with microbes

Abbreviations: S, short term (< 2 years); L, longer term (2–5 years).

874

volume

118 | number 6 | June 2010 • Environmental Health Perspectives



Inland recreational waters—state of the science

in epidemiologic studies. This anchoring of
the QMRA predictions will enhance their scientific credibility for predicting recreational
waterborne illness.
Longer-term research. Modeling water
quality in real time. Long-term research
is required to characterize the transport,
fate, and persistence of microbes and their
molecular targets in sediments and soils.
Understanding how these variables change
as a function of solar radiation, rainfall, and
biotic and hydrologic factors will advance
our ability to develop mechanistic models
for watershed management and set pollutant
discharge limits.
Pollutant source as a determinant of
health risk in IW. New epidemiologic studies would fill the data gap that currently precludes directly comparing the FIB-health risk
relationship in coastal and IW. Ideally, several
inland sites should be selected, each with a
different type of dominant source of fecal pollution. Description of both illness rate and
illness severity will be important to more completely characterize risk. Health data should
be collected in conjunction with data on indicators and pathogens in surface waters and
sediments using conventional and emerging
microbial detection methods. QMRA should
be performed in tandem with the epidemiologic studies.

Conclusions

We endorse the development of science-based
criteria to protect the health of those who
use marine, Great Lakes, and riverine and
lacustrine recreational waters. We think that
the distinction of IW versus CW is of less
importance than more fundamental variables such as the scale of the body of water,
the source of the pollutant, and the effects
of sediment, which translate into differences
in the densities, transport, and fate of indicators and pathogens. Differences in these
variables between IW and CW may translate
into weaker indicator–pathogen and indicator–health risk relationships for IW compared with CW. It remains an open question
whether sediment in IW changes the relationship between enterococci qPCR measures
and health risk, which has been described at
coastal beaches impacted by human fecal pollution. A challenge in addressing health risks is
the imprecision in defining of risk, as frequent
mild illness (seen in coastal epidemiologic
studies) may be of less public health concern
than infrequent severe illness (described in
outbreaks of disease in IW). We suspect that
the application of coastal-derived criteria
should result in rates of sporadic mild illness
that are no higher (and possibly lower) in IW
than CW. We are concerned about outbreaks
of severe disease caused by fecal matter from

Appendix 1. Critical questions for IW criteria development
1) Microbial indicators as predictors of pathogen exposure and health risks. What are the
transport, fate, persistence, and regrowth characteristics of indicators and pathogens in
climatically and hydrologically diverse IW?
2) Fecal pollution sources as predictors of pathogen exposure and health risk
a) Pathogen exposure
		 • What are the prevalence, concentration, and virulence of human pathogens in fecal
		 matter from birds, livestock, and wildlife mammals?
		 • What is the likelihood that the various animal sources will pollute IW (proximity,
		 scale)?
		 • How does fecal pollutant source modify the FIB-pathogen relationship?
b) Health risk: how does fecal source modify indicator–health risk relationships?
3) Molecular methods for water quality testing
a) What are optimal test methods in terms of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and
precision? How can PCR inhibitors best be addressed? What markers perform best for
source identification?
b) The interpretation of rapid FIB measures of indicators: what are the relevant molecular
targets that predict pathogen density and/or health risk in IW? Do viable cells detected
by qPCR better predict risk than nonviable cells or cell-free DNA? How is the ratio of
these three fractions impacted by wastewater treatment and environmental variables?
c) How can molecular methods be standardized and simplified for widespread
implementation?
4) Other approaches to predicting IW recreation health risks
a) QMRA validation: how do QMRA predictions compare with epidemiologic
observations? How can QMRA methods and inputs be improved?
b) Mechanistic and regressions models of water quality
		 • Can coastal approaches for modeling FIB be optimized for IW?
		 • Can real-time models predict pathogen exposure and health risk?
c) How can sanitary surveys, as a means of characterizing indicators, pathogens, or
pollutant sources in IW, be validated and standardized?

Environmental Health Perspectives •

volume

118 | number 6 | June 2010

other bathers, wildlife, and livestock. In IW
with limited dilution capacity and close proximity to sources, outbreaks of severe disease
may be difficult to prevent by the application of coastal-derived criteria (this was not
a conclusion of the workshop and represents
the authors’ views). As critical research questions are answered, a basis will be established
for developing criteria that would afford a
similar level of protection in IW as in CW, at
least for mild sporadic illness. The implementation of microbial monitoring of IW will
be a challenge to local government agencies.
Should rapid FIB monitoring, QMRA, sanitary survey data, or real-time modeling prove
to be predictive of health risks in IW, these
approaches could be used to protect the public from recreational waterborne illness.
References
Ashbolt NJ, Reidy C, Haas CN. 1997. Microbial health risk at
Sydney’s coastal bathing beaches. In: Proceedings of
the 17th Federal Convention of the Australian Water and
Wastewater Association Meeting (AWWA), Melbourne,
Australia, 16–21 March, 1997. Sydney, Australia:Australian
Water and Waste Association, 104–111.
Bae S, Wuertz S. 2009. Discrimination of viable and dead fecal
Bacteroidales bacteria by quantitative PCR with propidium
monoazide. Appl Environ Microbiol 75(9):2940–2944.
Bányai K, Bogdán A, Domonkos G, Kisfali P, Molnár P, Tóth A,
et al. 2009. Genetic diversity and zoonotic potential of
human rotavirus strains, 2003–2006, Hungary. J Med Virol
81(2):362–370.
BEACH Act (Beaches Environmental Assessment and Coastal
Health Act). 2000. Public Law 106-204. Available: http://
www.epa.gov/waterscience/beaches/rules/act.html
[accessed 20 January 2010].
Boehm AB. 2007. Enterococci concentrations in diverse coastal
environments exhibit extreme variability. Environ Sci
Technol 41(24):8227–8232.
Boehm AB, Ashbolt NJ, Colford JM Jr, Dunbar LE, Fleming LE,
Gold MA, et al. 2009. A sea change ahead for recreational
water quality criteria. J Water Health 7(1):9–20.
Boehm AB, Grant SB, Kim JH, Mowbray SL, McGee CD,
Clark CD, et al. 2002. Decadal and shorter period variability
of surf zone water quality at Huntington Beach, California.
Environ Sci Technol 36(18):3885–3892.
Boehm AB, Keymer DP, Shellenbarger GG. 2005. An analytical model of enterococci inactivation, grazing, and
transport in the surf zone of a marine beach. Water Res
39(15):3565–3578.
Boehm AB, Whitman RL, Nevers MB, Hou D, Weisberg SB.
2007. Nowcasting recreational water quality. In: Statistical
Framework for Recreational Water Quality Criteria and
Monitoring (Wymer LJ, ed). West Sussex, UK:Wiley,
179–210.
Bruce MG, Curtis MB, Payne MM, Gautom RK, Thompson
EC, Bennett AL, et al. 2003. Lake-associated outbreak of
Escherichia coli O157:H7 in Clark County, Washington,
August 1999. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 157(10):1016–1021.
Byappanahalli M, Fujioka R. 2004. Indigenous soil bacteria and
low moisture may limit but allow faecal bacteria to multiply
and become a minor population in tropical soils. Water Sci
Technol 50(1):27–32.
Byappanahalli MN, Whitman RL, Shively DA, Sadowsky MJ,
Ishii S. 2006. Population structure, persistence, and seasonality of autochthonous Escherichia coli in temperate,
coastal forest soil from a Great Lakes watershed. Environ
Microbiol 8(3):504–513.
Calderon R, Mood E, Dufour A. 1991. Health effects of swimmers and non-point sources of contaminated waters. Int J
Environ Health Res 1:21–31.
Colford JM Jr, Wade TJ, Schiff KC, Wright CC, Griffith JF,
Sandhu SK, et al. 2007. Water quality indicators and the
risk of illness at beaches with nonpoint sources of fecal
contamination. Epidemiology 18(1):27–35.

875



Dorevitch et al.

Davies CM, Long JA, Donald M, Ashbolt NJ. 1995. Survival
of fecal microorganisms in marine and freshwater sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 61(5):1888–1896.
Desmarais TR, Solo-Gabriele HM, Palmer CJ. 2002. Influence
of soil on fecal indicator organisms in a tidally influenced subtropical environment. Appl Environ Microbiol
68(3):1165–1172.
Dorner SM, Huck PM, Slawson RM. 2004. Estimating potential environmental loadings of Cryptosporidium spp.
and Campylobacter spp. from livestock in the Grand
River Watershed, Ontario, Canada. Environ Sci Technol
38(12):3370–3380.
European Commission. 2010. Epibathe. Available: http://
ec.europa.eu/research/fp6/ssp/epibathe_en.htm [accessed
4 May 2010].
Ferguson CM, Charles K, Deere DA. 2009. Quantification of
microbial sources in drinking water catchments. Crit Rev
Environ Sci Technol 39(1):1–40.
Ferley JP, Zmirou D, Balducci F, Baleux B, Fera P, Larbaigt G,
et al. 1989. Epidemiological significance of microbiological pollution criteria for river recreational waters. Int J
Epidemiol 18(1):198–205.
Fewtrell L, Godfree AF, Jones F, Kay D, Salmon RL, Wyer MD.
1992. Health effects of white-water canoeing. Lancet
339(8809):1587–1589.
Fewtrell L, Kay D, Salmon RL, Wyer M, Newman G, Bowering G.
1994. The health effects of low-contact water activities in
fresh and estuarine waters. J Inst Water Environ Manag
8:97–101.
Frick WE, Ge Z, Zepp RG. 2008. Nowcasting and forecasting concentrations of biological contaminants at beaches: a feasibility and case study. Environ Sci Technol 42(13):4818–4824.
Griffith JF, Cao Y, McGee CD, Weisberg SB. 2009. Evaluation of
rapid methods and novel indicators for assessing micro­
biological beach water quality. Water Res 43(19):4900–4907.
Haas CN, Rose JB, Gerba CP. 1999. Quantitative Microbial Risk
Assessment. New York:John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Hou D, Rabinovici SJ, Boehm AB. 2006. Enterococci predictions
from partial least squares regression models in conjunction with a single-sample standard improve the efficacy
of beach management advisories. Environ Sci Technol
40(6):1737–1743.
Ishii S, Yan T, Shively DA, Byappanahalli MN, Whitman RL,
Sadowsky MJ. 2006. Cladophora (Chlorophyta) spp. harbor
human bacterial pathogens in nearshore water of Lake
Michigan. Appl Environ Microbiol 72(7):4545–4553.
Jackson LA, Kaufmann AF, Adams WG, Phelps MB, Andreasen
C, Langkop CW, et al. 1993. Outbreak of leptospirosis associated with swimming. Pediatr Infect Dis J 12(1):48–54.
Keene WE, McAnulty JM, Hoesly FC, Williams LP Jr, Hedberg K,
Oxman GL, et al. 1994. A swimming-associated outbreak of
hemorrhagic colitis caused by Escherichia coli O157:H7
and Shigella sonnei. N Engl J Med 331(9):579–584.
Lee JV, Dawson SR, Ward S, Surman SB, Neal KR. 1997.
Bacteriophages are a better indicator of illness rates than
bacteria amongst users of a white water course fed by a
lowland river. Water Sci Technol 35(11):165–170.
Matthijnssens J, Potgieter CA, Ciarlet M, Parreno V, Martella V,
Banyai K, et al. 2009. Are human P[14] rotavirus strains
the result of interspecies transmissions from sheep or

876

other ungulates that belong to the mammalian order
Artiodactyla? J Virol 83(7):2917–2929.
Morgan J, Bornstein SL, Karpati AM, Bruce M, Bolin CA,
Austin CC, et al. 2002. Outbreak of leptospirosis among triathlon participants and community residents in Springfield,
Illinois, 1998. Clin Infect Dis 34(12):1593–1599.
NRDC (National Resources Defense Council), U.S. EPA
(Environmental Protection Agency). EPA Settlement
Agreement. [Anonymous]. 2008. Available: http://www.epa.
gov/waterscience/criteria/recreation/pdf/sa.pdf [accessed
20 January 2010].
Noble RT, Weisberg SB. 2005. A review of technologies for
rapid detection of bacteria in recreational waters. J Water
Health 3(4):381–392.
Nocker A, Sossa-Fernandez P, Burr MD, Camper AK. 2007. Use
of propidium monoazide for live/dead distinction in microbial ecology. Appl Environ Microbiol 73(16):5111–5117.
Olyphant GA, Thomas J, Whitman RL, Harper D. 2003.
Characterization and statistical modeling of bacterial (Escherichia coli) outflows from watersheds that
discharge into southern Lake Michigan. Environ Monit
Assess 81(1–3):289–300.
Olyphant GA, Whitman RL. 2004. Elements of a predictive model
for determining beach closures on a real time basis: the
case of 63rd Street Beach Chicago. Environ Monit Assess
98(1–3):175–190.
Philly RiverCast. 2009. A Daily Forecast of Schuylkill River Water
Quality in Philadelphia. Available: http://www.phillyrivercast.
org/ [accessed 23 April 2010].
Rutjes SA, van den Berg HH, Lodder WJ, de Roda Husman AM.
2006. Real-time detection of noroviruses in surface water
by use of a broadly reactive nucleic acid sequence-based
amplification assay. Appl Environ Microbiol 72(8):5349–5358.
Stapleton CM, Kay D, Wyer MD, Davies C, Watkins J, Kay C, et al.
2009. Evaluating the operational utility of a Bacteroidales
quantitative PCR-based MST approach in determining the
source of faecal indicator organisms at a UK bathing water.
Water Res 43(19):4888–4899.
Steets BM, Holden PA. 2003. A mechanistic model of runoffassociated fecal coliform fate and transport through a
coastal lagoon. Water Res 37(3):589–608.
Tsai YL, Olson BH. 1992. Rapid method for separation of bacterial
DNA from humic substances in sediments for polymerase
chain reaction. Appl Environ Microbiol 58(7):2292–2295.
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1983. Health
Effects Criteria for Marine Recreational Waters. Available:
http://www.epa.gov/nerlcwww/mrcprt1.pdf [accessed
20 January 2010].
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1984. Health Effects
Criteria for Fresh Recreational Waters. Available: http://www.
epa.gov/nerlcwww/frc.pdf [accessed 20 January 2010].
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1986. Ambient
Water Quality Criteria for Bacteria –1986. Available: http://
www.epa.gov/waterscience/beaches/files/1986crit.pdf
[accessed 20 January 2010].
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2006. Beach
Monitoring and Notification. Report to Congress. Available:
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/beaches/report/
[accessed 20 January 2010].
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). Water Quality

volume

Assessment and Total Daily Loads Information (ATTAINS)
Database. Available: http://www.epa.gov/waters/ir/
[accessed 20 January 2010].
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2009. Review
of Published Studies to Characterize Relative Risks from
Different Sources of Fecal Contamination in Recreational
Waters. Available: http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/
criteria/recreation/pdf/fecalcontamrecreationalwaters.pdf
[accessed 20 January 2010].
van Asperen IA, Medema G, Borgdorff MW, Sprenger MJ,
Havelaar AH. 1998. Risk of gastroenteritis among triathletes
in relation to faecal pollution of fresh waters. Int J Epidemiol
27(2):309–315.
Wade TJ, Calderon RL, Brenner KP, Sams E, Beach M,
Haugland R, et al. 2008. High sensitivity of children to
swimming-associated gastrointestinal illness: results using
a rapid assay of recreational water quality. Epidemiology
19(3):375–383.
Wade TJ, Calderon RL, Sams E, Beach M, Brenner KP, Williams
AH, et al. 2006. Rapidly measured indicators of recreational
water quality are predictive of swimming-associated
gastro­intestinal illness. Environ Health Perspect 114:24–28.
Wade TJ, Pai N, Eisenberg JN, Colford JM Jr. 2003. Do U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency water quality guidelines
for recreational waters prevent gastrointestinal illness?
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ Health
Perspect 111:1102–1109.
WERF (Water Environment Research Foundation). 2009. Report
on the Experts Scientific Workshop on Critical Research
and Science Needs for the Development of Recreational
Water Quality Criteria for Inland Waters. Alexandria,
VA:WERF. Available: http://www.werf.org/AM/Template.
cfm?Section=Research_Profile&Template=/CustomSource/
Research/PublicationProfile.cfm&id=PATH4W09 [accessed
20 January 2010].
Wheeler Alm E, Burke J, Spain A. 2003. Fecal indicator bacteria
are abundant in wet sand at freshwater beaches. Water
Res 37(16):3978–3982.
Whitman RL, Nevers MB. 2004. Escherichia coli sampling reliability at a frequently closed Chicago Beach: monitoring and management implications. Environ Sci Technol
38(16):4241–4246.
Whitman RL, Nevers MB, Korinek GC, Byappanahalli MN. 2004.
Solar and temporal effects on Escherichia coli concentration at a Lake Michigan swimming beach. Appl Environ
Microbiol 70(7):4276–4285.
Wiedenmann A, Kruger P, Dietz K, Lopez-Pila JM, Szewzyk R,
Botzenhart K. 2006. A randomized controlled trial assessing
infectious disease risks from bathing in fresh recreational
waters in relation to the concentration of Escherichia coli,
intestinal enterococci, Clostridium perfringens, and somatic
coliphages. Environ Health Perspect 114:228–236.
Yamahara KM, Walters SP, Boehm AB. 2009. Growth of enterococci in unaltered, unseeded beach sands subjected to
tidal wetting. Appl Environ Microbiol 75(6):1517–1524.
Yoder JS, Hlavsa MC, Craun GF, Hill V, Roberts V, Yu PA,
et al. 2008. Surveillance for waterborne disease and outbreaks associated with recreational water use and other
aquatic facility-associated health events—United States,
2005–2006. MMWR Surveill Summ 57(9): 1–29.

118 | number 6 | June 2010 • Environmental Health Perspectives

