37



38



39



40



a mean indicator density limit to be used as a guideline. This requires the regression of
X on Y. These lines along with their confidence limits, correlation coefficients and
formulae are given in Figure 9. The 95 percent confidence limits for the mean
enterococcus densities predicted for the observed swimming-associated rates are given
in Table A52. The author favors the use of the criteria for HCGI symptoms because of
the greater credibility of its data base and because it is more conducive to economic
analysis. The 95 percent confidence limits for the regression lines as shown (Figure 9)
are rather broad although the slopes are significantly different from zero. This was not
unexpected since the relationships obtained are generalizations which may be altered by
any of a number of temporal and spacial factors relative to the indicator, the pathogen,
the relationship of the pollution sources to the bathing beach, the levels of the specific
illnesses in the overall population, and the immune status of the swimmers. These will
be discussed in the next two sections
Examination of the illness-indicator relationships by location and by year at a given
location could provide some insight as to possible spatial and temporal effects. The latter
was not attempted because of the small number of points available for analysis by year.
The regression lines for the New York City study were compared to those obtained from

41



42



the combination of the Lake Pontchartrain and the Boston Harbor studies; however, even
for the trials clustered by similar indicator densities (Table 6), each line was defined by
only nine points. Significant differences were obtained between the lines for highly
credible but not total GI symptoms. The lines for total GI symptoms were not
significantly different; however, those for HCGI symptoms were, although the two lines
stay virtually within the 95 percent confidence limits of the total data. This provides
some basis for the generalization obtained from the single regression line. This
generalization may not be totally accurate in all situations. Thus, in the present case, the
sources of pollution to the beaches in the Lake Pontchartrain and Boston Harbor studies
were ill-defined and, presumably, more distant. This and the effect of the immune status
of the swimming population could explain the significant differences between the
regression lines for highly credible but not total GI symptoms. In any event, these results.
emphasize the conclusion that guidelines derived from these criteria cannot be used
without judgment; rather, they must be used in concert with good public health practice
(e.g., taking into consideration changes in the incidence of enteric disease in the
discharging population), an environmental (sanitary) survey, and judgment with regard
to their limitations in time and space. In fact, the correlations obtained are remarkably

43



good when the sources of temporal and geographic variability are considered, and this
has some interesting implications concerning the agent(s) and host population, i.e.,
ubiquity, infectivity, survival, immunity, etc.
THE ETIOLOGIC AGENT(S)
When the study design for the EPA program was being developed in 1969-1970, it was
thought that swimming in sewage-polluted waters would constitute a relatively minor
route of transmission for GI illness and that relatively high levels of pollution (as indexed
by microbial indicator densities) would be required before GI illness could be detected.
These assumptions were made on the basis of existing notions and available information
(8,24). Both these assumptions were incorrect. If the nonswimming rates for GI
symptomatology can be considered as those for the population at large, then swimming
in sewage-polluted waters constitutes a significant route of transmission for the illnesses
obtained, at least for individuals of “swimming age.” This can be seen from the tabular
(Table II) and graphic (Figure 10) representations of the ratios of the rates for

swimmers divided by those for nonswimmers against the enterococcus densities for the
clustered trials. In fact, at enterococcus densities of 70 and 10/100 ml, respectively, the
rates for total and HCGI symptoms among swimmers were twice those for nonswimmers,
and they are projected to be equal (a ratio of “I”) at an enterococcus density of about
1/100 ml. This suggests that the etiologic agent(s) for the observed GI symptomatology
is present in sewage in large numbers, that it is highly infective and/or that it survives
sewage treatment, disinfection and/or transport better than the indicator.

44



One of the desired outputs from the program was an answer to the question: Does the
swimming-associated illness rate increase with the levels of these specific illnesses in
the population at large? This relationship was not observed for the types of illnesses
obtained in this study (Table 12), probably because of the high level of immunity to the
agent in the population.
Initially, it was thought that the Egyptian data could be used in the derivation of the
final criteria. By the end of the first year of the Egyptian study, it was obvious that the
data from the Alexandria residents could not be so used, and by the end of the third year,
it was concluded that this was also true of data from the Cairo visitors. The regression
lines for the rates of swimming-associated vomiting and diarrhea from these two groups
along with those for GI and HCGI symptoms from the United States studies against the
corresponding mean enterococcus densities are presented in Figure 11. It can be seen
that, in the United States studies, gastrointestinal illness rates comparable to those
obtained in the Egyptian study were associated with bathing in waters with much lower
enterococcus densities. Part of the dissimilarity is probably due to differences in the
nature (raw vs. treated) and proximity of the pollution sources in the United States and
Egyptian studies. However, disparities in the immune state of the populations to the
etiologic agent(s) probably accounts for most of the differences in the indicator-illness
relationships obtained.
The importance of immunity in the epidemiology of the swimming-associated
gastroenteritis is also supported by the age distribution of the attack rates. In most of the
studies, children (<10 years of age) were found to have the highest symptom rates.
The following characteristics of the swimming-associated illness were obtained in or
can be inferred from the findings of the EPA program: (i) The illness is a relatively
benign gastroenteritis with a short incubation period (Figure 12), acute onset, short

45



46



duration (Table 13) and rare, if any, sequelae. (ii) It is widely distributed; most individuals
are immune, and, in general, children have the highest attack rates. (iii) The etiologic
agent is highly infectious, is present in sewage in large numbers, and/or survives sewage
treatment disinfection and transport in the marine environment somewhat better than the
indicators. These considerations suggest the human rotavirus and/or the parvo-like viruses
as. the etiologic agents.
There are at least three explanations for the observations that individuals who swim
during several days in a given week (from the Egyptian study) or for prolonged periods
during a given day (from the New York City study) have low GI symptom rates. The
obvious one is that these are “healthier” individuals. The second assumes that the extent
of swimming is correlated with age, that is, individuals who swim regularly and
extensively are more experienced and ingest less of the bathing water. However, it is
commonly assumed that children are in the water the longest and also ingest the most
water. The third explanation requires that the illnesses involved have short (< 3 days)
incubation periods and that there may be a good immunity to the etiological agents The
rationale for the Egyptian observations is that the susceptible individuals become ill within
a day or so of the time they start swimming.

47



48



SECTION 7
LIMITATIONS IN THE USE OF THE
RECOMMENDED CRITERIA
The criteria presented in this report (the enterococcus density in the bathing water
against the swimming-associated rates for total and HCGI symptoms) are
generalizations which have been found to apply in a number of situations. Nevertheless,
a number of considerations, including the limitations in the indicator concept itself,
impact on the use of the criteria as well as the guidelines and standards derived
therefrom. More important, these considerations require that the findings from
monitoring programs be interpreted in the light of good public health and
environmental practice. They have been described elsewhere (49, 66) and several of the
more important ones will be considered herein.
SMALL POINT SOURCES
The rationale for the use of guidelines and standards based on fecal indicator
densities for indexing the health hazards in sewage polluted waters is that, under
average conditions of illness in the discharging population, there is a reasonably
constant indicator to pathogen ratio in the sewage and its receiving waters. Thereby,
an acceptable probability of illness caused by the pathogen can be extrapolated to a
given indicator density, which is then recommended as a guideline and promulgated as
a standard. Such relationships appear to hold for waters receiving the discharges from
relatively large municipal sewage treatment facilities. However, as the number of
individuals who contribute to the source of the fecal wastes becomes smaller and
smaller, the indicator-pathogen ratio will vary more and more from the average upon
which the guideline or standard is based. In the extreme case where the fecal wastes
of a single ill individual or carrier are discharged into the water, the number of
pathogens may equal or exceed the number of indicator microorganisms. Routine
examination of such waters for fecal indicators would be of no value. Furthermore, the
routine examination for the pathogens would not be especially useful since the release
of enteric pathogens will be sporadic. The solution is administrative action prohibiting
such discharges into recreational waters.
ILLNESS RATES IN THE DISCHARGING POPULATION
Most epidemiologists and health officers recognize that, under epidemic conditions,
the actual indicator-pathogen ratio may change sufficiently from that upon which a
guideline was based so that the acceptable risk of illness will be exceeded unless the
guideline is temporarily made more restrictive. The recent swimming-associated
outbreak of shigellosis on the Mississippi River below Dubuque, Iowa (15) appears to
represent an instance where, although the 200/100 ml fecal coliform guideline was
probably exceeded, the outbreak did not occur until there was a large enough number
of ill individuals and carriers in the discharging population. Conversely, if there is a
significant and consistent decrease in the illness rate in the discharging population over
a prolonged period of time, the rate for that specific illness associated with an existing
indicator guideline or standard may be considerably less than predicted. The absence
of recreational water-associated salmonellosis probably represents a case in point.

49



FECAL INDICATORS VERSUS PATHOGENS
The use of fecal indicators such as coliforms or portions of the coliform population, fecal
streptococci, and C. perfringens for indexing the health hazards in drinking and
recreational waters dates back to the late 1800s and early 1900s (32). This occurred shortly
after these organisms were first isolated and associated with the fecal wastes of
warm-blooded animals. Within the context of the limitations being discussed, such
practices were and are sound both on theoretical and practical grounds since it is
recognized that (i) there are large number of pathogenic bacteria and viruses potentially
present in municipal sewage (67,68), each with its own probability of illness associated
with a given dose; (ii) monitoring for each of the pathogens on a routine basis would be
a herculean task; (iii) enumeration methods for some of the more important pathogens are
unavailable and for the rest are difficult; (iv) pathogen density data are difficult to interpret
because the methodology generally is imprecise and inaccurate and because of the meager
dose-response data available; and (v) on theoretical grounds, the intent is not to index the
presence of the pathogen but rather its potential to be there in sufficient numbers to cause
unacceptable health effects.
By no means should the foregoing be construed as suggesting that recreational water
quality criteria and the derived guidelines are unnecessary. To the contrary, criteria
amenable to risk analysis are absolutely essential. It is evident from the nature of the
illness indicator (Y on X) lines and the heavy usage of estuarine and coastal beaches in
the United States that large numbers of individuals are becoming ill as a consequence of
swimming in sewage-polluted waters. Furthermore, as seen from the Dubuque outbreak
(15), the potential for more serious illness exists. Nevertheless, since the illnesses involved
are relatively benign, there is undoubtedly a rate which is acceptable; however, the
acceptances of the risks involved should be deliberate decisions with consideration of all
the factors involved and with local input.
A temporary consequence of the application of the criteria may be the withdrawal of
certain recreational resources from public use. However, the long range impact should be
pollution abatement. This requires better technology for obtaining the data base needed for
the translation of the target area criteria which have been developed into effluent
guidelines on a case-by-case basis.
The findings from the EPA program have raised a number of questions. One is the
nature of the etiologic agent for the gastrointestinal symptomatology. A second is the need
for a more human fecal specific and environmentally resistant indicator. This relates to the
difficult question of stormwater runoff and nonpoint sources. The third is need for separate
criteria for fresh waters. Studies in progress which address these questions should be
continued.

50



REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Campolini, E. 1921. A Study of Typhoid Fever Incidence in the Health Center
District of New Haven. Unpublished Report.
Scott, W. J.1951. Sanitary Study of Shore Bathing Waters. Bull. Hyg. 33:353.
National Technical Advisory Committee. 1968. Water Quality Criteria. Federal
Water Poll. Control Adm. Dept. of the Interior. Washington, DC, p. 7.
Streeter, H. W. 1951. Bacterial Quality Objectives for the Ohio River. A Guide for
the Evaluation of Sanitary Condition of Waters Used for Potable Supplies and
Recreational Uses. Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission. Cincinnati,
OH.
Cox, C. R. 1951. Acceptable Standards for Natural Waters Used.fbr Bathing. Proc.
Amer. Soc. Civ. Eng. 77:74.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Quality Criteria for Water. U.S.E.P.A.,
Washington, DC. 1976.
Henderson, J. M. 1968. Enteric Disease Criteria for Recreational Waters. J. San.
Eng. Div. 94:1253.
Moore, B. 1959. Sewage Contamination of Coastal Bathing Waters in England and
Wales: A Bacteriological and Epidemiological Study. J. Hyg. 57:435.
Garber, W. F. 1956. Bacteriological Standards for Bathing Waters. Sewage &
Indust. Wastes. 28:789.
Committee on Water Quality Criteria, National Academy of Sciences National
Academy of Engineering. Water Quality Criteria. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency EPA-R3-73-033, 1972. Washington, DC.
Cabelli, V.1.1978. Swimming-Associated Disease Outbreaks. Jour. Water Poll.
Control Fed. 50:1374.
Center for Disease Control. Typhoid Fever at Covington State Park, Louisiana. In:
Salmonella Surveillance CDC No.18, Nov., 1963.
Center for Disease Control. Epidemiologic Notes and Reports. Typhoid
Fever-Alabama. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports. USDHEW/PHS Vol.21,
No.32, 12 August, 1972, p.280.
Flynn, M. J., and D. K. B. Thistlewayte. 1964. Sewage Pollution and Sea Bathing.
Second Int'l. Conf. on Water Pollution Res.
Rosenberg, M. L., K. K. Hazlet, J. Schaefer, J. G. Wells, and R. C. Pruneda. 1976.
Shigellosis from Swimming. JAMA 236:1849.
Denis, F. A., E. Blanchouin; A. Delignieres, and P. Flamen. 1974. Coxsackie A16
Infection from Lake Water. JAMA 228:1370.
Hawley, H. B., D. P. Morin, M. E. Geraghty, 3. Torakow, and C. A. Phillips. 1973.
Coxsackie Virus B Epidemic at a Boys' Summer Camp. JAMA 226:33.
Bryan, J. A., J. D. Lehmann, I. F. Setiady, and M. H. Hatch. 1974. An Outbreak of
Hepatitis A Associated with Recreational Lake Water. Amer. J. Epidemiol. 99:145.
Center for Disease Control. Gastroenteritis Associated with Lake SwimmingMichigan. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports. USDHEWI PHS Vol.28
No.35, 7 September, 1979.p. 413.
Mosley, J. W. 1965. Transmission of Viral Diseases by Drinking Water. In:
Transmission of Viruses by the Water Route. Ed. G. Berg, Wiley, New York. p.5.

51



REFERENCES (Continued)
21. Wahdan, M. H. Alexandria, Egypt Study. In: International Symposium on Health
Effects of Liquid Waste Disposal, June 4-7, 1979. Alexandria, Egypt. High Institute
of Public Health, Alexandria University. In press.
22. Hornick, R. B., S. E. Graisman, T. E. Woodward, H. L. Dupont, A. T. Dawkins, and
M. J. Snyder. 1970. Typhoid Fever: Pathogenesis and Immunologic Control. New
Eng. J. Med. 283:686.
23. Dupont, H. L., R. B. Hornick, A. T. Dawlcins, M. J. Snyder, and S. B. Formal. 1969.
The Response of Man to Virulent Shigella flexneri 2a. J. Infect. Dis. 119:1969.
24. Stevenson, A. H. 1953. Studies of Bathing Water Quality and Health. J. Amer. Public
Hlth. Assoc. 43:529.
25. Shuval, H. I. The Case for Microbial Standards for, Bathing Beaches. In: Discharge
of Sewage from Sea Outfalls. Ed. H. Gameson. Pergamon, London. 1975. p.95.
26. Kehr, R. W. and C. T. Butterfield. 1943. Notes on the Relation Between Coliforms
and Enteric Pathogens. Public Health Rpts. 58:589.
27. Kehr, R. W., B. S. Levine, C. T. Butterfield and A. P. Miller. 1941. A Report on the
Public Health Aspects of Clarmming in Raritan Bay. Public Health Service Report.
Reissued in 1954 by Division of Sanitary Engineering Services USPHS.
28. Mechalas, B. J., K. K. Hekimian, L. A. Scbinazi, and R. H. Dudley. An Investigation
into Recreational Water Quality. Water Quality Criteria Data Book. Vol.4. 18040
DAZ 04/72 Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 1972.
29. Geldreich, E. B. 1970. Applying Bacteriological Parameters to Recreational Water
Quality. JAWWA 62:113.
30. Cabelli, V.3.1976. Indicators of Recreational Water Quality. In: Bacterial
Indicators/Health Hazards Associated with Water. Eds. A. W. Hoadley and B. J.
Dutka. ASTM, Philadelphia, p.222.
31. Melnick, J. L. 1976. Viruses in Water. In Viruses in Water: Ed. G. Berg, H. L.
Bodily, E. H. Lennette, J. L. Melnick and T. G. Metcalf, American Public Health
Assn., Washington, DC. p.5.
32. Prescott, S.C., C. A. Winslow, and M. McCrady. 1945. Water Bacteriology, 6th Ed.
Wiley, New York.
33. American Public Health Association, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, 14th Ed. Amer. Public Health Assoc., Washington, DC. 1976.
34. Department of Health and Social Security, Government of Great Britain. The
Bacteriological Examination of Water Supplies, Reports on Public Health and
Medical Subjects No.71 Appendix I. London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office, 1969,
4th Ed.
35. Dufour, A. P., and V.J. Cabelli. 1975. Membrane Filter Procedure for Enumerating
the Component Genera of the Coliform Group in Seawater. Appl. Microbiol. 29:826.
36. Dufour, A. P., E. R. Strickland, and V. 3. Cabelli. A Procedure for Enumerating
Thermotolerant E. coli in Surface Waters. Proc. 9th National Shellfish Sanitation
Workshop. June, 1975.
37. Dufour, A. P., and L. B. Lupo. A Membrane Filter Method for Enumerating
Klebsiella Species. Abst. Ann. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 1977. p.262
38. Levin, M. A., J. R. Fischer, and V.3. Cabelli. 1975. Membrane Filter Technique for
Enumeration of Enterococci in Marine Waters. Appl. Microbiol. 30:66.
39. Bisson, J. W., and V.J. Cabelli. 1979. Membrane Filter Enumeration Method for
Clostridium perfringens. Appl. and Environ. Microbiol. 37:55.
40. Resnick, G., and M. A. Levin. Enumeration of Bifidobacterium in Aquatic and Fecal
Samples. Abstr. Ann. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 1977. p.261.

52



REFERENCES (Continued)
41. McBride, G. A Bacteriophage Simulant for Enteric Virus Behavior in Water Systems. M.
S. Thesis, Univeristy of Rhode Island, Kingston. 1979.
42. Buck, J. D., and P. M. Bubucis. 1978. Membrane Filter Procedure for Enumeration of
Candida albicans in Natural Waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 35:237.
43. Levin, M. A., and V.J. Cabelli. 1972. Membrane Filter Technique for Enumeration of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Applied Microbiol. 24:864.
44. Rippey, S. R., and V.J. Cabelli. 1979. Membrane Filter Procedure for Enumeration of
Aeromonas hydrophila. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 38:108.
45. Watkins, W. D., C. D. Thomas, and V.J. Cabelli. 1976. Membrane Filter Procedure for
Enumeration of Vibrio parahaemolyticus Appi. Environ. Microbiol. 32:679.
46. Levin, M. A., 3. R. Fischer, and V.J. Cabelli. 1974. Quantitative Large-Volume Sampling
Technique. Appl. Microbiol. 28:515.
47. Calderon, R., and M. A. Levin. 1980. Quantitative Method for tne Enumeration of
Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. J. Clin. Microbiol. 13:130.
48. Wun, C. W., R. W. Walker, and W. Litsky. 1976. The Use of XAD-2 Resin for the
Analysis of Coprostanol in Water. Water Res. 10:995.
49. Cabelli, V.J. Evaluation of Recreational Water Quality, the EPA Approach. In: Biological
Indicators of Water Quality. Eds. S. James and L. Evison, Wiley, London. 1979. p.14-1.
50. Dufour, A. P. E. coli: The Fecal Coliform. In: Bacterial Indicators/Health Hazards
Associated with Water. Eds. A. W. Hoadley and B. J. Dutka. ASTM, Philadelphia, 1976.
p.48.
51. Miescier, J.J. The Occurrence and Variability of Bacterial Indicator Organisms in Raw and
Treated Sewage. M. S. Thesis, Univ. of Rhode Island, Kingston. 1977.
52. Vlassoff, L. T. Kiebsiella. In: Bacterial Indicators/Health Hazards Associated with Water.
Ed. A. W. Hoadley and B. J. Dutka. ASTM. Philadelphia, 1977.1). 275.
53. Seidler, R. J., J. E. Morrow, and S. T. Bagley. 1977. Klebsielleae in Drinking Water
Emanating from Redwood Tanks. Appi. Environ. Microbiol. 33:893.
54. Cabelli, V.J., and L. J. McCabe. 1974. Recreational Water Quality Criteria. News of
Environmental Research in Cincinnati.
55. McCabe, L. J. Epidemiological Consideration in the Application of Indicator Bacteria in
North America. In: Bacterial Indicators/Health Hazards Associated with Water. Ed. A. W.
Hoadley and B. J. Dutka. ASTM, Philadelphia, 1977. p.15.
56. Verber, J.L. 1972. Shellfish-Borne Disease Outbreaks. Internal report. Northeast Technical
Service Unit, U.S. Food and Drug Admin., Davisville, Rhode Island.
57. American Public Health Association, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, 13th Ed. Amer. Public Health Assoc., Washington, DC. 1971.
58. Cabelli, V.J., M. A. Levin, A. P. Dufour, and L. J. McCabe. The Development of Criteria
for Recreational Waters. In: International Symposium bn Discharge of Sewage for Sea
Outfalls. Ed. H. Gameson, Pergamon, London, England. 1974. p.63.
59. Haberman, P. W. Study of Sanitary Criteria for Criteria for Salt Water Beaches: Pretest of
Illness Inquiry System and Site Selection, Part 11972 (Jan. 1973), Part 2 (Jan.1974).
Epidemiological Study of Health Effects Among Swimmers at New York Recreational
Beaches Part 1, 1974 (Feb.1975); Phase 111 1975 (April 1976). Reports to United States
Environmental Protection Agency on Grant Nos. 802240 and 803254.
60. Cabelli, V.J., A. P. Dufour, M. A. Levin, L. J. McCabe, and P. W. Haberman. 1979.
Relationship of Microbial Indicators to Health Effects at Marine Bathing Beaches. Am. J.
Public Health. 69:690.
61. Cabelli, V.J., A. P. Dufour, M. A. Levin, and P. W. Haberman. The Impact of Pollution on
Marine Bathing Beaches: An Epidemiological Study. In: Middle Atlantic Continental Shelf
and the New York Bight. Limnology and Oceanography, Special Symp. Vol.2. Ed. G.
Gross, 1976. p.424.
53



REFERENCES (Continued)
62. Ktsanes, V K., A. C. Anderson, and J. H. Diem. Epidemiological-Microbiological Study
of Health Effects Among Swimmers at Lake Pontchartrain in New Orleans: 1977-1978.
Final report to United States Environmental Protection Agency on Grant No. 805341.
63. Cabelli, V.J. United States Studies. In: International Symposium on Health Effects of
Liquid Waste Disposal. June 4-7,1979, Alexandria, Egypt. High Institute of Public
Health, Alexandria University. In press.
64. El, Molla, A. Isolation of Pathogenic Enteric Organisms from Recreational Marine
Waters in Alexandria. In: International Symposium on Health Effects of Liquid Waste
Disposal. June 4-7, 1979, Alexandria, Egypt. High Institute of Public Health, Alexandria
University. In press.
65. Hanes, N. B., and R. Fragala. 1967. Effect of Seawater Concentration on Survival of
Indicator Bacteria. Jour. Water Poll. Control Fed. 39:97.
66. Cabelli, V.J. New Standards for Enteric Bacteria. In: Water Pollution Microbiology. Ed.
R. Mitchell, Wiley, New York, 1978. p.233.
67. Kelly, S. M., and W. W. Sanderson. 1960. Density of Enteroviruses in Sewage.
J.W.P.C.F. 32:1269.
68. SCS Engineers. Health Effects Associated with Wastewater Treatment and disposal
Systems: State-of-the-Art Review. Vol. 1. EPA-600/l-79-016a. U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. April, 1979. p.66.

54

