Critical Review

Microbial Source Tracking: State of the Science

Downloaded via UNIV OF ILLINOIS CHICAGO on February 25, 2022 at 14:45:19 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

JOYCE M. SIMPSON,
JORGE W. SANTO DOMINGO,* AND
DONALD J. REASONER
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development,
Water Supply Water Resources Division, Cincinnati, Ohio 45268

Although water quality of the Nation’s lakes, rivers and
streams has been monitored for many decades and especially
since the passage of the Clean Water Act in 1972, many
still do not meet the Act’s goal of “fishable and swimmable”.
While waterways can be impaired in numerous ways,
the protection from pathogenic microbe contamination is
most important for waters used for human recreation, drinking
water and aquaculture. Typically, monitoring methods
used for detecting potential pathogenic microorganisms in
environmental waters are based upon cultivation and
enumeration of fecal indicator bacteria (i.e. fecal coliforms,
E. coli, and fecal enterococci). Currently, there is increasing
interest in the potential for molecular fingerprinting
methods to be used not only for detection but also for
identification of fecal contamination sources. Molecular
methods have been applied to study the microbial ecology
of environmental systems for years and are now being
applied to help improve our waters by identifying problem
sources and determining the effect of implemented
remedial solutions. Management and remediation of water
pollution would be more cost-effective if the correct
sources could be identified. This review provides an outline
of the main methods that either have been used or have
been suggested for use in microbial source tracking and
some of the limitations associated with those methods.

Introduction: What Are Current Water Quality Issues?
Today, there are still waters in the U.S. that do not meet the
1972 Clean Water Act goal of “fishable and swimmable”. For
example, approximately 35, 45, and 44% of assessed rivers,
lakes and estuaries, respectively, have been classified as
impaired based on the pollutant levels (1). Achievement of
this goal was expected to eliminate waterborne microbial
disease as a leading cause of public health problems.
However, in terms of the Clean Water Act, water quality
designations in the United States still vary from unimpaired
(pristine) to impaired (highly polluted). Water quality impairment can result from a wide array of pollutants/pollutant
classes including temperature (thermal pollution), sediment,
pathogens, nutrients, metals, dissolved oxygen, pH, pesticides
and other organic chemicals, to name a few. These pollutants
can be transmitted to the public via recreational waters,
surface water and groundwater, thereby potentially putting
entire communities at risk. Water quality standards under
* Corresponding author phone: (513)569-7085; fax: (513)569-7328;
e-mail: santodomingo.jorge@epa.gov. Corresponding author address: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 26 W. Martin Luther
King Dr., AWBERC Mail Stop 387, Cincinnati, OH 45268.
10.1021/es026000b Not subject to U.S. Copyright. Publ. 2002 Am. Chem. Soc.
Published on Web 11/15/2002

the Clean Water Act and amendments (2-4) are the State’s
goals for individual water bodies and provide the legal basis
for control decisions under the Act. Water quality monitoring
activities provide the chemical, biological and physical data
needed to determine the present quality of a State’s waters
and to identify the pollutant sources to those waters. Section
303(d) requires that total maximum daily loads (TMDL) be
established for the impaired waters by states, territories, and
authorized tribes with oversight by the U.S. E.P.A. (5).
Impairment of water quality may involve multiple pollutants
or pollutant classes, requiring the implementation of one or
more pollution control remedies (e.g. best management
practices, BMPs) to address all the pollutants that contribute
to the overall water quality impairment. Thus, a TMDL for
the achievement of State water quality standards must be
developed for each pollutant or pollutant class in waters
designated as impaired. Control techniques (BMPs and/or
effluent limits) must be implemented for both point and
nonpoint sources to meet the TMDLs.
Chemical Issues. Chemical quality of the water varies
primarily with the variety of industrial and agricultural
sources found in the watershed. Agricultural sources contribute animal wastes, commercial fertilizers, pesticides and
herbicides, and nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen) to the
water via storm event runoff. In some geographic areas,
geological formations and soil may contribute inorganic
chemical contaminants such as arsenic, iron, copper and
sulfur compounds. The intent is to develop plans to reduce
pollutant source loads that contribute nutrients (primarily
nitrogen and phosphorus), reduce the biological oxygen
demand (improve the dissolved oxygen budget), and minimize toxic substances that enter the water.
Physical Issues. Physical aspects of water quality involve
primarily suspended solids that cause turbidity in the water
and reduce light penetration, thus interfering with photosynthesis in aquatic plants. Suspended solids carried by
surface runoff also settles out of the water column to create
suffocating coatings on rooted plants, attached growth on
rocks and other surfaces and interferes with essential life
processes of aquatic plants and animals. The settled solids
form sediments that may be contaminated with toxic
materials, depending on the source(s) and types of contamination. Thermal pollution is another physical characteristic of waters used for industrial plant cooling or power
plant cooling that interferes with essential life processes of
many types of aquatic plants and animals. Thermal pollution
must generally be mitigated to preserve the health of aquatic
communities downstream from the thermal source.
Microbiological Issues. Of the designated uses of water
listed in section 303(c) of the Clean Water Act, protection
from pathogenic microbe contamination is most important
for waters used for recreation (primary and secondary
contact), public water supplies, aquifer protection, and
VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002 / ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 9 5279



protection and propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife.
Microbiological impairment of water may be assessed by
monitoring, usually for the presence of indicator bacteria
such as fecal coliforms, E. coli or fecal enterococci. These
microorganisms are associated with fecal material from
humans and other warm blooded animals and their presence
in water may also signal the presence of enteric pathogens.
Specific pathogen monitoring may also be used to assess
impairment of water. The U.S. EPA has published a protocol
for developing pathogen TMDLs that provides guidance for
this process (5). Exceeding the criteria developed for E. coli
and enterococci bacteria indicates that the water may contain
human enteric pathogens (such as hepatitis A virus) that
could cause illness in exposed persons. Detection of pathogens and tracking them to their source(s) is a topic of intense
interest in view of the current TMDL requirements. Microbial
Source Tracking (MST) is one approach to determining the
sources of fecal pollution and pathogens affecting a water
body. It is based on the assumption that, using an appropriate
method and appropriate indicator bacteria, sources of the
microorganisms can be found and characterized as to animal
or human origin.

What Is a TMDL and Which Are the Problem Sources?
A TMDL establishes the maximum pollutant load that a water
body can receive and still meet water quality standards and
provides the basis for establishing water quality controls.
TMDLs are also used to establish waste load allocations
among point and nonpoint pollutant sources. Nonpoint
sources such as agriculture, forestry, wildlife and urban runoff
are continuous sources of impairment to water quality (e.g.
agricultural runoff after a rain event or unrestricted access
of livestock and wildlife to rivers and streams). Yet it is
exceedingly difficult to determine the origin of particular
contaminants within these categories. Management and
remediation of water pollution would be more cost-effective
if the sources could be correctly identified and remediation
efforts allocated proportionally.
Since bacteria are among the most common biological
pollutants affecting assessed rivers and streams and can
provide evidence of possible fecal contamination that may
cause waters to be unsafe for swimming and other recreational activity, indicator organisms are frequently monitored
(1). Although it is important to distinguish point vs nonpoint
contributions to the problem (e.g. treatment plant [point] vs
wildlife [nonpoint]), it is also meaningful to distinguish
between various nonpoint animal sources. To alleviate the
overall fecal pollution problem, it is critical to determine the
origin of the bacterial contamination whether the source is
farm animals, companion animals, or wildlife. Of particular
interest are those of commercial agricultural significance,
namely production facilities for cattle, swine, poultry, sheep,
and horses due to the large number of animals present.
Agricultural and Concentrated Animal Feedlot Operations (CAFO). Agricultural based fecal contamination of
streams, rivers and groundwater has several origins, including
runoff from manure deposited on grazed pastures, runoff
from the application of fecal slurries to fields (both surface
spread and injection) (6-8), and runoff/discharge from CAFO
fields and barns. Cattle grazing increases fecal coliform levels
in agricultural runoff as compared with background levels,
and it has been reported that 80% of water samples from
areas surrounded by pastures exceed water quality standards
(9, 10).
Urban Runoff and Septic Systems. Urban stormwater
fecal coliform concentrations often far exceed the concentrations considered safe for water contact (11). However,
fecal coliform sources in stormwater discharges are not always
easily attributable to broken sanitary sewer lines, sewer
overflows, leaking septic tanks or illegal discharges (12). A
5280 9 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY / VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002

complication is that while the runoff from urban watersheds
originates from both pervious and impervious surfaces (e.g.
lawns and sidewalks respectively), the impervious surfaces
are almost always more hydrologically active because their
water storage capacity is minimal. Additionally, the amount
of fecal pollutants washed off by rainfall depends on the
amount of feces that accumulated during the preceding dry
period and the volume and velocity of the runoff during a
rain event. Moreover, varying contributions from residential,
commercial and industrial areas into connecting storm drain
systems can further complicate the issues regarding originating source.
Wildlife. Nonpoint source contributions from wildlife can
be substantial, are difficult to identify and even harder to
remediate. Typical wildlife which have been linked to fecal
problems include deer, dogs, raccoons, cats, waterfowl, and
to a lesser extent, rats (13, 14). Once sources are identified,
remediation can consist of instructing owners in responsible
pet care and employment of licensed trappers/hunters to
remove overpopulated wildlife. Fencing, establishment of
riparian zones, and other practices that limit access of wildlife
to streams might reduce wildlife loading rates. However, since
restricting access of wildlife to streams and rivers is not
practical, better wildlife management practices need to be
developed to ensure that ecosystems are not out of balance.

Best Management Practices for Remediation of Water
Quality Issues
Once a TMDL is developed, plans must be made and
implemented for reducing the loading of the target pollutant.
The BMP treatment method(s) chosen to attempt to reduce
pollutant loading will depend on the type and nature of the
pollutant and the characteristics of the watershed. For
example, if reduction of nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen
from agriculture), sediments and bacteria is the goal,
exclusion of livestock, stream bank protection and riparian
restoration practices might be evaluated (15). On the other
hand, if pathogen removal from animal wastewater (16) or
municipal wastewater (17) is the goal, constructed wetlands
(surface or subsurface flow) might be chosen as the most
appropriate BMP. Other BMPs are available depending on
the nature of the pollutant but will not be addressed in this
review. Several researchers have begun to examine the effects
of BMP implementation on reduction of fecal contamination
from pastures and feedlots; the reader is referred to ref 18
for further review.

Microbiological Methods Used in TMDL Studies
The microbiological examination of surface waters has
obvious implications pertinent to two watershed issues. First,
the introduction of bacteria relevant to public health into
watersheds is indirectly regulated using TMDL criteria.
Monitoring of a microbiological TDML is normally achieved
by determining the densities of bacterial indicators of fecal
contamination, (e.g., fecal coliforms, E. coli and fecal
enterococci). Second, the identification of fecal pollution
sources impacting watersheds is increasingly being performed using MST methods (Table 1). Those methods that
use bacteria, in particular, as target organisms are also known
as bacterial source tracking (BST) methods. Most MST
methods rely on the fingerprint profiles of fecal bacteria,
although viruses, protozoa, and chemical markers have been
suggested as capable of discriminating between human and
animal fecal sources. As described by Sinton et al. (19),
investigations into the use of microbes for fecal source
tracking have mainly involved four approaches: 1) speciation
- finding species indicative of the source; 2) biochemical
reactions - biochemical tests to differentiate sources; 3)
assemblages and ratios - comparison of two or more fecal



TABLE 1. Example Case Studies of MST Techniques Used in Watersheds
technique

library

target

description

ref

Molecular Methods
ribotyping

yes

E. coli

repetitive PCR (rep-PCR)

yes

E. coli

Pulsed Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE)

yes

E. coli

Length Heterogeneity PCR (LH-PCR) and
Terminal Restriction Fragment Length
Poly-morphism (T-RFLP)

no

BacteroidesPrevotella

Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis
(DGGE)

yes

E. coli

Antibiotic Resistance Analysis (ARA)

yes

ARA

yes

Fecal
Determined reliability and repeatability of method for
(47,48)
Streptococci
identifying sources of fecal pollution. Patterns of
isolate resistance to nine antibiotics were analyzed
by discriminant analysis. ARA patterns differed
among isolates from various sources of fecal pollution
and could be used to identify these sources.
E. coli
ARA patterns in E. coli were analyzed by cluster analysis (50)
and used to identify sources of fecal pollution in
Apalachicola Bay. Sets of E. coli isolates were
obtained from water, sewage, humans, andwildanimal feces. Data indicated that wildlife species
were influencing water quality and further
investigation was necessary.

Genotypic method used to determine origin of fecal
bacteria in water from Idaho and Georgia to
evaluate method ability to discriminate not only
source but also geographical variation.
Used to generate DNA fingerprints from E. coli
isolated from human and animal sources.
Multivariate analysis successfully differentiated
isolates into corresponding groups. Data
indicated that it was possible to differentiate
between human and nonhuman sources.
E. coli isolates from seasonally varied streams and
sediment samples were compared to isolates from
known fecal sources. Human vs nonhuman
distinctions were made and evidence
suggested that E. coli regrowth perpetuated
elevated fecal coliform densities without
regard to specific hosts.
Identified human and cow-specific genetic markers
in fecal samples. Host-specific patterns
suggested that there are species composition
differences in Bifidobacterium and BacteroidesPrevotella populations of human and cow feces.
Evaluated strain level differences in E. coli from
bovine, poultry and human sources. Isolates
from nearby streams yielded unique patterns
with a few patterns matching those of the
known sources. High diversity among
environmental isolates made it difficult to
ascribe more strains found in water
specific hosts.

(62)

(71)

(14)

(63,64)

(77)

Nonmolecular Methods

bacteria population ratios; and 4) DNA profiles - fingerprints
using genomic DNA or specific phylogenetic genes of fecal
bacteria. While all these approaches have been used with
different levels of success in the U.S., the use of phenotypic
profiles, specifically antibiotic resistance analysis (ARA), has
been the most commonly used in small watersheds. However,
the application of phenotypic profiles is not as effective when
larger geographical areas are under investigation. Since
genotypic profiles may be more stable than phenotypic
profiles and, theoretically, are capable of discriminating
between different animal sources, DNA-based fingerprinting
techniques have received increasing attention as potential
tools for fecal-pollution source tracking. This review focuses
on the DNA profiles and only briefly describes some of the
other options available today.

Microbial Source Tracking Methods
The methods used in source tracking studies can be divided
into two groups: those based on molecular methods and
those based on biochemical methods. In addition, MST
techniques may also be categorized as library dependent
and library independent (Table 1). In this particular case a
“library” is a collection of microorganisms from different
potential sources as well as from the watershed under study.
Most MST techniques used thus far have depended on the
development of comprehensive libraries. Although the latter
libraries are often made of several hundreds of isolates per
potential source impacting the particular watershed (i.e.,
human, wildlife, and livestock), the minimum number of

isolates needed to perform statistically sound studies has
not been determined. Most methods have not been thoroughly tested, although several have been successfully
applied. For example, the states of Virginia and North Carolina
have funded several studies where researchers used antibiotic
resistance analysis (ARA), carbon utilization profiling (CUP),
and ribotyping to pinpoint the primary sources of fecal
contamination (16, 17, 20, 21). Some of the methods and
approaches used in source tracking will be described in more
detail in the following sections.

Source Tracking Target Selection
One of the most important decisions in MST studies relates
to target selection. In a broad sense, targets can be of
microbial origin (e.g., E. coli) or of chemical origin (e.g.,
caffeine). The microorganisms suggested as adequate targets
have included bacterial groups, protozoan oocysts and viruses
(22). Two criteria that influence the approach to be used are
as follows: 1) the number of sources contributing to the
contamination and 2) the type of discriminatory power
needed on a particular case (e.g., human vs animals or animal
specific). Essentially, an approach that uses a target that is
only capable of discriminating between animal and human
contamination might not be adequate if it is necessary to
discriminate between different animal sources.
Bacterial Targets. Four bacterial genera thus far have been
used as target organisms in MST studies: Escherichia,
Enterococcus, Bacteroides, and Bifidobacterium. Species
belonging to these bacterial groups are normally present in
VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002 / ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 9 5281



the feces of higher mammals and birds. MST studies involving
E. coli and fecal enterococci have been performed with
bacterial strains isolated from different fecal sources, while
research based on nonculturing approaches have targeted
Bacteroides spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. Thus far, while
studies using E. coli isolates dominate the scientific literature,
the use of fecal enterococci as target organisms has gained
some popularity. One advantage of using E. coli and fecal
enterococci is that they are relatively easy to grow. Other
bacterial indicators, like anaerobic fecal bacteria (e.g. Bacteroides spp.) require special culturing equipment that is not
common in most laboratories.
Protozoan Targets. Research with Cryptosporidium spp.
oocysts has shown that there are genotypes specific to
different animals (e.g., cow, dogs, and humans) and for this
reason oocysts have been used to identify the probable origins
of fecal pollution in stormwaters (23). Using this approach
Xiao et al. (24) reported that humans and cattle feces were
primarily responsible for the contamination of the surface
water samples, although several genotypes associated with
wild animals were also obtained. However, the levels of
Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts in natural waters are relatively
low, which translates into the need to concentrate oocysts
from 40 to 100 L of water before a signal can be detected.
Concentration of microbial biomass from large volumes of
water increases the concentration of organic material that
can interfere with nucleic acid manipulation. Therefore,
failure to concentrate oocysts and ineffective nucleic acid
extraction from environmental samples has precluded the
use of this approach in most natural waters with modest
levels of fecal contamination.
Viral Targets. Studies using coliphages, which are viruses
that infect E. coli, have shown that there are four different
groups of male specific (or F+) RNA coliphages. Group I
coliphages are found in both human and animal feces, group
II and III are predominantly associated with human fecal
contamination, while group IV is predominantly associated
with animal fecal waste (25). Recently, similar observations
were made during a study investigating the prevalence of F+
RNA coliphages as indicators of animal fecal contamination
(26). The detection of each of these groups in water samples
can be performed using serological techniques or by using
gene probes in hybridization assays. However, the genetic
distinction between coliphages from different animals does
not appear to be great enough to discriminate among various
animal sources. Additionally, serotyping is expensive and
time-consuming, thus the use of coliphage-based methods
might be limited to screening for the presence/absence of
animal and/or human fecal pollution. For further information
regarding F+ RNA coliphage use in source tracking, the reader
is referred to ref 19. Other viral targets currently under
investigation are the bovine enteroviruses (27, 28). These
viruses have been isolated from cattle, deer, geese, and from
the general environment encompassed within closed cattle
lots. Viral variants were found to coexist in some areas, leading
to the possibility that sequencing individual strains could
provide clues to the origin of contamination.
Chemical Targets. The use of chemical targets has been
suggested as an alternate approach to biological markers
based on the premise that certain chemicals are only found
in fecal samples. Different chemical compounds have been
recently evaluated as tools to predict sources of fecal pollution
(29). Most chemical markers have been used primarily to
trace human contamination. For example, caffeine, fragrance
materials, and fluorescent whitening agents (laundry detergent brighteners) have been under investigation due to
their exclusive use by humans (30). Fecal sterols and fecal
stanols found in humans are also promising sewage pollution
markers. However, the long-term fate of these organic
chemicals in environmental waters has not been studied in
5282 9 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY / VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002

great detail. Additional studies to verify the host specificity
of many of these compounds (e.g., fecal stanols, like
coprostanol) are needed to confirm their potential value.
Immunological Targets. Another approach focuses on the
identification of species-specific secretory immunoglobulin
A (sIgA) in fecally impacted waters. sIgA is normally present
in the feces of mammals, and it has been implicated in the
protection of intestinal mucosa against enteric infections
(31). Since sIgA excreted in relatively high concentrations by
mammals, is associated with easy to concentrate particulate
matter (e.g., feces), and can be detected using relatively easy
to follow immunological procedures, its possible value as an
indicator of fecal pollution of water is currently under
investigation. Like any other chemical marker, the fate of
sIgA once it enters a body of water is relevant to its potential
usefulness. A long half-life would give the wrong impression
of recent fecal contamination, while rapid degradation might
underestimate the levels of fecal pollution. In addition, while
the assays are relatively sensitive, the currently proposed
approach requires concentrating a large volume of water
(i.e., 100 gallons) which is cumbersome to perform in most
field settings.

Use of Phenotypic Methods for Source Tracking
Most methods currently used to monitor microbiological
TMDLs in watersheds depend on culturing bacterial indicators of fecal contamination (e.g., E. coli and fecal enterococci).
Indicator organisms are used because they tend to occur in
the same sources as pathogenic organisms (e.g. fecal material), are present in greater densities, and often are easier to
identify using standard culture methods. While these methods
provide an indication of the fecal pollution levels in surface
waters, unfortunately, most culturing techniques tend to
underestimate bacterial densities in environmental samples,
especially when fecal bacteria are exposed to environmental
conditions that can cause physical/physiological injury and
stress (e.g., nutrient limitation and UV light). In addition, the
identification of many bacterial water isolates is not always
accurate via conventional phenotypic characterization. Although some environmental bacterial isolates can be identified using phenotypic traits, it can take several days before
an accurate identification is achieved. Consequently, culturing methods cannot assess the microbiological quality of
watersheds in a timely manner.
It is worth noting that methods that depend on culturing
bacteria can introduce biases that only reflect trends for
organisms that can be readily isolated from environmental
waters. Thus, the level of diversity of an easy to culture species
and the number of strains examined could play a role in the
outcome of a MST study. For example, studies by Gordon
and co-workers (32, 33) have shown that host specificity
cannot explain the genetic variation of E. coli populations in
rodents and other mammals. It has also been suggested that
a large number of E. coli strains can be isolated from hosts
of the same species living in close proximity and that the
clonal diversity of E. coli changes as a result of adapting to
conditions outside of the animal gut (33). The results from
these studies argue against the use of enteric bacteria and
other commensal bacteria in general, as target organisms in
MST methods. Such a potentially high level of genetic diversity
among commensal bacteria can seriously complicate the
genetic analysis of isolates found in secondary habitats.
Fecal Coliform/Fecal Streptococci (FC/FS) Ratio. According to studies performed by Geldreich and co-workers
(34, 35), human feces normally has a ratio of fecal coliform
to fecal streptococci greater than or equal to 4.0, whereas
ratios below 0.7 are associated with animal feces. Based on
this criterion, several researchers have used the FC/FS ratio
to differentiate between human and animal fecal pollution
sources (36, 37). However the use of FC/FS ratio has been



strongly criticized, primarily due to the differences in fecal
enterococci densities found in individuals with different diets
(38) and the different effects that environmental factors (e.g.,
temperature and UV light) have on the survival of coliforms
and streptococci bacteria (39-41). In fact, the environmental
persistence of fecal enterococci in marine waters can directly
affect the FC/FS ratio and, therefore, the interpretation of
water quality data (42). Moreover, a recent study showed
that the FC/FS ratio could not discriminate between human
and domesticated animals fecal samples (10). Due to the
inconsistent relationship between the ratio and pollution
sources and the fact that the taxonomy of the fecal streptococci group was recently revised (43), it is not surprising
that the use of the FC/FS ratio in source tracking has
significantly decreased in the last two decades.
Antibiotic Resistance Analysis (ARA). A phenotypic based
method uses antibiotic resistance patterns for fecal streptococci, enterococci, or E. coli to identify the fecal sources
(Table 1). The premise is that human fecal bacteria will have
greater resistance to antibiotics than those from animal
sources (44). The fecal microbiota of animals should have
significantly less and different resistance to the various
antibiotics and concentrations used commercially (45). Fecal
bacteria are grown in microtiter trays and then transferred
onto a series of agar plates, each containing one specific
antibiotic concentration. After incubation, each isolate is
scored for growth or no growth, and a resistance pattern
emerges that can be used in source differentiation. Since a
replicator can be used to transfer bacterial cultures, hundreds
of isolates can be processed in a week (45). In contrast with
most molecular fingerprint studies, hundreds to thousands
of isolates are typically analyzed in studies using ARA.
Discriminant analysis of antibiotic resistance patterns for
fecal enterococci (21, 46-49), E. coli (50), and fecal coliforms
(46, 51) has been used to differentiate between human and
animal sources. A variety of sources were included for
comparison in these studies, including humans, sewage,
cattle, chickens, turkeys, dogs, pigs, raccoons, wild birds,
wild animals, and pristine waters. Typical results from these
studies indicated that the average rate of correct classification
(ARCC) ranged from 62 to 94% when individual species were
compared. When comparisons included just two categories
(human vs nonhuman) ARCC values increased about 10%.
However, when unknown source isolates (water isolates) were
compared with the databases, ARCC values decreased to
around 72%.
While it appears that the ARA approach may be appropriate to MST analysis of simple watersheds, caution is
advised with its application to large-scale, complex systems
due to potentially lower ARCC values for unknowns and the
array of genetic variability present in these organisms
resulting from different exposures to antibiotics during
carriage in their hosts. This is particularly relevant when
multiple sources of pollution are contributing to watershed
contamination at relatively similar levels. ARA could also be
difficult to interpret in scenarios where agricultural practices
involve application of fecal materials to land. Another issue
to consider is that ARA is susceptible to bias due to the transfer
of plasmids (and other mobile genetic elements) carrying
multiple antibiotic resistance genes. Acquisition or loss of a
plasmid can change the resistance profile of an isolate,
thereby adding another layer of complexity to the analysis
and/or library construction. On the other hand, gene transfer
might play a significant role only when the environmental
conditions considerably prolong the survival of the targetedbacterial group.
Carbon Utilization Profile (CUP). Another phenotypic
technique, CUP is based on differences among bacteria in
their use of a wide range of carbon and nitrogen sources for

energy and growth. The BIOLOG system allows the user to
rapidly perform, score, and tabulate 96 carbon source
utilization tests per isolate and is widely used in the medical
field for identification of clinical isolates. While, this method
works well in the laboratory for pure culture characterization/
identification, there are many environmental factors in a
watershed that can affect bacterial nutrient requirements
that may make this method impractical for field determination (45). Like ARA, the CUP method is relatively simple
and allows for the analysis of hundreds of isolates in a short
period of time. CUP has been discussed as a potential new
tool in fecal source tracking (20); however, no peer-reviewed
publications concerning the successful use of this method
were available at the time of this review. Since most
commercially available kits for biochemical profiling (e.g.,
BIOLOG) have been developed for the identification of clinical
bacterial isolates, the development of microtiter plates that
contain substrates compatible with environmental enterococcus isolates seems to be a prerequisite for the application
of CUP in MST studies.

Use of Nucleic Acid Based Molecular Methods for
Source Tracking
Recently, nucleic acid-based methods have been used by
microbial ecologists to circumvent many of the shortcomings
of the culture-based methods. Of particular importance to
TMDL development is the advancement of Polymerase Chain
Reaction (PCR)-based methods that have the potential of
detecting the presence of fecal bacteria without relying on
culturing the target organisms. Furthermore, recently developed PCR methods that are coupled with fluorescencebased detection, are capable of near real time monitoring of
bacteria present in environmental samples (52, 53). Although
these methods are showing much promise, the most obvious
problem of PCR-based methods relates to the removal of
inhibitory substances (e.g., cations and humic acids) found
in water samples. These problems are exacerbated when
biomass concentration steps are required to increase the
detection sensitivity. Improvements in the way water samples
are concentrated and processed will be necessary to precisely
quantify low bacterial numbers, as is currently required for
regulatory decisions of TMDL programs. Additionally, there
are biases inherent in the PCR technique itself, although
using optimized conditions and parameters can minimize
these biases. Despite some technological limitations, the main
advantage of PCR techniques is the potential for tracking
several different genes concurrently, thereby allowing for a
greater level of certainty in source tracking and pathogen
detection.
Several molecular methods used for MST have relied on
universal genetic markers to discriminate between different
bacterial strains (Table 2). Some examples of these are
ribotyping, length heterogeneity-PCR (LH-PCR), and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphisms (T-RFLP).
Other techniques rely on DNA sequences that are randomly
distributed throughout the chromosome of many bacteria.
LH-PCR and T-RFLP are considered library independent
methods since they do not require the isolation of environmental strains. This eliminates any biases introduced by the
culturing steps. However, the robustness of methods such
as LH-PCR and T-RFLP depends on the extent to which
DNA sequences from environmental strains are represented
in the currently available molecular databases (e.g., GenBank
(54) and the Ribosomal Database Project (55)). In the
following section we summarize several of the most recent
MST studies using molecular techniques.
Ribotyping. Ribotyping consists of fingerprint pattern
generation for genomic 16S rDNA restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLP) [essentially, patterns based upon size
VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002 / ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 9 5283



TABLE 2. Comparison of Molecular Typing Methods Which May Be Considered for MSTa
method
RFLP

description

advantages

disadvantages

electrophoretic analysis where DNA is detected with reproducible
probes after Southern blotting
most strains typeable

technically demanding
many probes needed to achieve
adequate discrimination
ribo-typing southern hybridization of genomic DNA cut with
works with most strains
slow
restriction enzymes, probed with
automated
complex procedure
ribosomal sequences
inconclusive results
phage
testing for susceptibility to different types of phages does not require electrophoresis need access to phage libraries
typeing
high level of host specificity
not all strains typeable
technically demanding
inconclusive results
rep-PCR
PCR is used to amplify palindromic DNA sequences discriminatory
cell culture required
couple with electrophoretic analysis
does not require knowledge of requires large database of isolates
genomic structure
variability increases as database
reproducible
increases
DGGE
electrophoretic analysis of PCR products based
works on isolates and total
technically demanding
on melting properties of the
DNA community
time-consuming
amplified DNA sequence
reproducible
limited simultaneous processing
LH-PCR
separates PCR products for host specific genetic
does not require culturing
expensive equipment required
markers based upon length differences
does not require database
technically demanding
T-RFLP
uses restriction enzymes coupled with PCR in which does not require culturing
expensive equipment required
only fragments containing a fluorescent
does not require database
technically demanding
tag are detected
PFGE
DNA fingerprinting using rare cutting restriction
high discrimination
long assay time
enzymes coupled with electrophoretic
works with most strains
limited simultaneous processing
analysis
reproducible
conclusive results
AFLP
DNA fingerprinting using both rare and frequent
high discrimination
technically demanding
cutting restriction enzymes coupled
works with most strains
expensive equipment required
with PCR amplification
reproducible
conclusive results
automatable
a Modified from ref 88.

differences of fragments of DNA related to the location of
specific target sequences] (56). In this technique, total
genomic DNA is extracted from pure cultures after which
the DNA is enzymatically treated. The digested DNA fragments are first separated via agarose gel electrophoresis and
transferred to nylon membranes. Southern blot hybridization
analysis is then performed using rDNA probes, which results
in a pattern composed of four to twelve bands. To increase
the discriminatory power of this technique, several restriction
enzymes can be independently used in separate analyses.
Ribotyping methods have typically been used in epidemiological studies (57-59) but are now being applied to MST.
Recently, Parveen et al. (60) used ribotyping to distinguish
fecal E. coli of human origin from pooled fecal E. coli isolates
of nonhuman origin. In this particular study, the ARCC for
human and nonhuman isolates was 82%. Fecal E. coli ribotype
patterns were also used by Carson et al. (61) to distinguish
among fecal isolates associated with human and seven
individual nonhuman hosts. While the results from the latter
study suggest that the technique could discriminate between
fecal bacteria of human and nonhuman origin, the ARCC
values were poor when isolates from more than three fecal
sources were analyzed. Compared to most MST studies using
ARA, a smaller number of isolates were analyzed in these
ribotyping studies. Since natural populations of E. coli exhibit
a high diversity of genetic variation, future studies using E.
coli ribotype patterns must substantially increase the number
of isolates in order to better assess the applicability of this
approach to MST. For example, in a recent study, Hartel et
al. (62) used ribotyping to show that geographic variability
exists for E. coli by comparing isolates from cattle, horses,
swine and chickens located either in Idaho or Georgia. While
Hartel and co-workers suggested that ribotyping could also
be used to discriminate among host species at one location,
they concluded that it would be contingent upon the use of
a large number of isolates.
5284 9 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY / VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002

Length Heterogeneity-PCR (LH-PCR) and TerminalRestriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (T-RFLP). LHPCR and T-RFLP are two other techniques which have
recently been proposed and are based on the detection of
fluorescently labeled 16S rDNA PCR products using an
automated DNA sequencer (63, 64). These methods are used
to analyze differences in lengths of gene fragments due to
insertions and deletions, and once a suitable target sequence
is identified, it can be followed easily through the automated
process. One advantage that they have over other molecular
and biochemical approaches is that they do not involve
culturing bacteria from the environmental samples and hence
the development of extensive culture-based libraries is not
required. Another advantage is that these methods have been
used to focus on the detection of rDNA sequences specific
to anaerobic fecal bacteria inhabiting the animal gastrointestinal tract. This is relevant since anaerobic bacteria
are present in animal feces in higher densities than conventional indicator bacteria. More importantly, most fecal
anaerobes do not survive for long periods in the environment
and their presence therefore represents recent fecal contamination events (19). MST studies performed by Bernhard
and Field using LH-PCR and T-RFLP have specifically
targeted the close relatives of Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides
spp. (63, 64). Several important findings have been documented using these methods. First, a significant diversity of
as yet undescribed Bacteroides-Prevotella 16S rDNA sequences is present in the feces of animals examined thus far.
Second, the Bacteroides-Prevotella group was suggested to
be a better indicator of source tracking in marine waters
than Bifidobacterium because specific markers for the latter
group were not always detected in bovine fecal samples or
in coastal waters associated with fecal pollution. Third,
Bacteroides-Prevotella fingerprints were capable of discriminating between cow and human fecal samples. However,
since these methods have only been evaluated against a



limited number of animal fecal samples, a more extensive
evaluation using other potential sources of contamination
is currently underway.
Repetitive PCR (rep-PCR). Hundreds of studies have used
conserved sequences in bacterial repetitive elements as PCR
primers to distinguish among different strains of the same
bacterial species. This typing approach, also known as repPCR, has been used to study many types of bacteria, including
phyto-pathogenic bacteria, (65-67), human pathogens (68,
69), and animal pathogens (70). rep-PCR has also been used
to examine fecal bacterial strains isolated from different
sources of fecal pollution; however, only one MST study using
rep-PCR has been published so far (71). There are three major
repetitive elements in bacteria that have been used to
generate bacterial fingerprints: REP, ERIC, and BOX. While
these repetitive elements are present in most Gram negative
bacteria tested, the BOX primers have been shown to be
better suited for MST studies. For example, Dombek et al.
(71) showed that a particular BOX-AR1 primer was more
useful in separating E. coli human isolates from nonhuman
isolates (geese, ducks, cows, pigs, chickens, and sheep) than
REP primers. In this study, between 78% and 100% of the
isolates were correctly assigned to the original source groups.
However, only 19-29 isolates per source were used in the
statistical analysis in this study, and, therefore, it is necessary
to interpret these results with caution.
Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE). The
DGGE technique is capable of discriminating between
different PCR products of similar size based on changes in
electrophoretic mobility which are influenced by the melting
properties of the DNA fragments (72, 73). DGGE has been
used to characterize and compare fecal and gastrointestinal
bacterial populations of both humans and animals, though
typically as a direct sample, rather than a complex matrix
component (74, 75). However, Farnleitner et al. (76) demonstrated that DGGE could be used to detect and differentiate
E. coli populations from fecally impacted freshwater samples,
but have not yet utilized their method to differentiate between
sources. Buchan et al. (77) used DGGE to differentiate
environmental E. coli isolates associated with bovine, poultry,
and human sources. The results from this study revealed
that DGGE patterns obtained for the samples analyzed could
not be used to pinpoint the source of contamination in the
watershed studied. Since the investigators only used 132
isolates for the analysis, it is possible that a larger database
might be required for this particular method to be useful in
source tracking. However, it should be noted that the gene
targeted for DGGE analysis must contain enough sequence
variability among the strains in order to find nucleotide
substitutions that are specific to a bacterial strain inhabiting
a particular host.
Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE). For PFGE
analysis, pure culture bacterial cells are placed in agarose
plugs where the DNA is digested using a series of restriction
enzymes. These digested plugs are then imbedded into
specialized electrophoresis gels and electrophoresed for an
extended period of time (avg. 30 to 50 h) with alternating
currents from different directions using specialized equipment. PFGE has been used extensively in clinical microbiology
and for some clinical scientists it represents the gold standard
(78). However, PFGE is time-consuming and the number of
isolates that can be processed simultaneously is limited.
Nonetheless, PFGE has been used for genotypic characterization of clinical and environmental E. coli and enterococcus
isolates to determine sources of contamination (79-82).
Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP). The
AFLP technique has two main advantages over other
fingerprinting methods: 1) it has the ability to inspect an
entire genome for polymorphisms and 2) it is highly
reproducible. AFLP analysis has been applied to many

different types of DNA samples (human, animal, plant, and
microbial) thereby demonstrating its potential to become a
universal DNA fingerprinting method (83). Indeed, AFLP has
been used successfully in taxonomical, epidemiological, and
ecological studies involving microbial parasites, fungi, and
bacteria (84). AFLP combines the use of RFLP and PCR
amplification to generate between 50 and 100 DNA fragments.
DNA fragments are commonly analyzed using modern DNA
sequencers containing fluorescence based detectors (85).
Automatic loaders allow the analysis of over one hundred
strains per day. Since fluorescent standards can be included
with each of the samples, normalization is a relatively simple
process. However, like other isolate fingerprinting methods,
this is a library dependent method and relies on cultivation
of the target organisms. Recently, Guan et al. (86) reported
results of a comparison study which used AFLP, ARA and
16S sequencing to discriminate among fecal sources of E.
coli. Their results indicated that AFLP was the most effective
of the three methods considered. However, as only 105
isolates were analyzed by AFLP, more extensive field testing
is necessary before this method is considered for routine
monitoring.

Problematic Issues Associated with MST Methods
Theoretically most fingerprinting techniques could be used
in MST studies. However, ARA, rep-PCR, AFLP and T-RFLP
seem to offer the best possibilities to discriminate between
different fecal bacterial strains. Examples of several methods
which have been used to date in watersheds and the key
advantages and disadvantages of some molecular typing
methods that have been considered in MST are summarized
in Tables 1 and 2. While results from MST studies could help
significantly in the implementation of best management
practices, there are a number of problems that need to be
addressed (Table 3). Some of these problems relate to
detection limits, temporal and spatial variability of markers,
and reproducibility of the assays. A clear understanding of
the role of each variable plays is necessary to obtain robust
results and correctly interpret the data. Some of the major
issues which need attention are described below.
The detection limit of many methods depends on the
type of approach used for source tracking. To apply PCR
methods to targets found in low levels, a concentration step
is necessary. However, the biomass concentration steps often
co-extract organic contaminants that can interfere with the
amplification of targeted genes. Thus, a low level of sensitivity
is often difficult to obtain for environmental samples.
Commercially available kits are now including DNA purification steps that help eliminate many of the PCR inhibitors.
One possible way to increase sensitivity of PCR methods for
the appropriate detection of very low cell densities is to target
genes such as the 16S rDNA that have multiple copies per
cell or to increase the cell densities via a cultural enrichment
step.
Spatial and temporal variations are factors that have not
been incorporated in most MST studies, and therefore, their
impact in source tracking is not well understood. However,
it is reasonable to assume that the number and locations of
the sampling sites within a particular watershed will have an
impact on how representative the results are. Moreover,
temperature and chemical changes associated with seasonal
variation can significantly affect the survival of microorganisms targeted. Flow dynamics and rainstorm events could
also affect the bacterial densities on a seasonal basis.
Reproducibility is relevant, in that the selected method
should give the same type of answer if standard operating
procedures are always followed. For example, a given method
should always be able to discriminate between the most
common animal sources of pollution on a particular watershed. These results should also be reproducible regardless
VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002 / ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 9 5285



TABLE 3. Evaluation Criteria for Performance Appraisal of MST
Methodsa
category of criteria

specific evaluation criteria

tier 1: measurement reproducibility of results within and
reliability
across laboratories
accuracy of classification of isolates into
the correctgroup of sources (for library
dependent methods)
confidence that an identified indicator is
from the presumed source (for library
independent methods)
level of resolution, or ability to
discriminate among sources
(i.e., human vs nonhuman, livestock
vs wildlife, nonhuman species
level, cattle from separate farms)
matrix stability (in what matrices, e.g.,
saltwater, freshwater, turbid water,
humic acid environments, is the
method applicable?)
geographical stability (over what area is
the method applicable?)
temporal stability (over what time frame
is the method applicable?)
confirmation by peer review
tier 2: management relationship to actual source(s) of
relevance
contamination
relationship to public health outcomes
relationship to commonly used water
quality indicators
ease of communication to the public
ease of communication to management
audiences
tier 3: cost and
equipment and laboratory facilities
logistics
required
training required
library size required (for library dependent
methods)
library development effort per “unit”
required (library dependent methods)
implementation time
cost of ensuring results are legally
defensible
cost per sample, including all operations
and maintenance overhead
sample turnaround time
a Table derived from EPA sponsored MST Workshop, Feb 2002, Irvine,

CA.

of fluctuations in the fecal loads from the different sources
that contribute to the contamination.
Another relevant issue relates to the stability of the marker
used in source tracking. While somewhat easier to track,
phenotypic markers (e.g., antibiotic resistance) are often
unstable if the selective pressure is not maintained. A similar
argument can be used against molecular fingerprinting
methods, like rep-PCR and AFLP. Since there is little selective
pressure to maintain an intact genome structure, this genetic
instability will increase the level of pattern complexity in
and outside of the host. In this context, the fingerprint method
should ideally depend on the use of stable markers that
possess some ecological relevance, for example, genes that
are associated with host-bacterial interactions. Such phenotypic and genotypic instability has a direct impact on the
number of microbial strains that need to be examined in any
particular study. As a consequence, substantial empirical
evidence is necessary to establish the predictive value of
methods that use unstable markers, particularly after the
targeted bacterial indicator group enters the aquatic environment.
The target microorganism chosen for use in MST will
influence the number of isolates that need to be examined
in order to achieve a desirable level of certainty in the data
analysis. For example, a larger culture collection (library) is
required when an organism with a high level of genetic
variation is used in a study. The number of isolates will also
5286 9 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY / VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002

depend on the type of method used. Methods with a large
number of distinct characters (e.g., band patterns) will require
smaller culture collections. Unfortunately, the numbers of
isolates and samples that are examined is often dictated by
economics and not by a statistically sound experimental
design. The fewer the number of fecal sources and the number
of isolates per source, the less reliable the statistical analysis
will be. Therefore, to have a good representation of the natural
clonal diversity in any watershed, it is necessary to examine
the largest possible number of isolates per fecal source and
per water sample. The analysis of a relatively similar number
of isolates per source is also useful for the overall predictive
power of any method.
The portability of databases is an issue due to the lack of
comparative studies, as it is currently unknown if any given
MST method can be applied to different regions. It is possible
that in most cases information gained will only be applicable
to a specific watershed, and therefore, most markers will not
transcend different geographical regions. At this time, the
universal value of all fingerprint methods remains at best
speculative.
The equipment and technical expertise necessary to
engage in a MST study is often limiting. The start up and
running cost associated with the use of a given molecular
technique is more expensive than for a biochemical profiling
method. Another concern relates to the level of education or
technical training needed for technical support personnel to
perform the actual experiments. In general, biochemical
methods are less difficult or cumbersome than molecular
methods, which do require a higher level of theoretical and
technical training. Moreover, the application of methods such
as PFGE for MST studies will be limited in that they are timeconsuming and not suitable for rapid identification of a large
number of isolates.

Summary and Future Prospects
Most MST methods have only been tested against a limited
number of watersheds, and many of them will require further
development before they can be considered appropriate for
source tracking of fecal contamination. Thus far, ARA appears
to be the most practical approach for source tracking in small
watersheds, primarily because it is relatively inexpensive and
simple to execute. Many of the molecular methods (e.g., AFLP,
and T-RFLP) appear promising, but they need to be used in
a larger number of studies that include a larger number of
isolates before any firm conclusions can be reached on their
applicability and usefulness. Similarly, the number of samples
from each potential animal source and from the habitat under
examination must be larger than those reported in most of
the published studies to more accurately calculate the
percentage of correctly classified isolates. To compare the
results from MST studies, the index of correct classification
or ARCC must be calculated using the same approach. It is
important to recognize that none of the current MST methods
have been systematically applied to evaluate the population
dynamics of the targeted organism(s) on a spatial and
temporal basis. Investigation is also needed as to how
environmental and biological factors within the primary
habitat (i.e., the animal gut) and the secondary habitats (i.e.,
watersheds) affect the stability of an organism’s fingerprint
profile.
A number of criteria for the accurate evaluation of different
MST methods were recently proposed by a panel of experts
that included scientists and engineers from Academia,
government and private industry (Table 3). Variables such
as library size, processing costs, and type of professional
expertise required for data development and data interpretation will almost certainly restrict the use of some methods
(e.g., molecular-based) on a case-by-case basis. Since the
effectiveness of the MST method may also depend on the



size of the watershed and the number of potential pollution
sources, the development of multidisciplinary research teams
will be necessary to determine which method(s) should be
used to discriminate between primary and secondary sources
of pollution. As it is possible that indicator bacteria like E.
coli and fecal enterococci are not the most adequate target
organisms for MST, support is also needed for research that
examines the population dynamics of different fecal organisms, including those that are difficult to culture. The
sequencing analysis of comprehensive 16S rDNA molecular
databases from different fecal sources may provide new
bacterial groups with closer associations with the hosts than
the currently used indicator organisms. The results from these
research initiatives could result in the development of
methods based on better indicators of fecal contamination.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to propose that future developments in gene chip technology (87) and microbial genomics will provide the opportunity of finding alternate
genetic markers in fecal bacteria that carry ecological meaning
and that correlate with host specificity. Some of these genes
are likely to be directly associated to host and microbial
interactions, like virulence factors (e.g., cellular attachment
and cell invasion) or to physiological traits that endow the
bacterium with an advantage toward occupying a particular
microbial niche in the gut of a particular animal group. If
some of these bacterial groups, bacterial genes or gene
sequences are found to be “host-specific”, this information
could be further used to develop assays such as real-time
PCR to track contamination sources in a matter of hours.
Using these tools, scientists will be able to study complex
microbial communities impacted with different levels of fecal
pollution and to better determine the risks associated with
the recreational use of such bodies of water. This would
permit development of an adequate microbiological framework to be used in risk management of U.S. recreational
waters.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the work done by the organizing
committee on the Microbial Source Tracking Workshop,
Irving, CA, 2002. Disclaimer: The views expressed in this
document are those of the individual authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views and policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Scientists in EPA’s Office
of Research and Development have reviewed and approved
this document in accordance with EPA’s peer and administrative review policies for presentation and publication.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not
constitute endorsement or recommendation for use.

Nomenclature
16S

subunit of ribosomal DNA used for phylogenetic analysis of bacteria

BST

bacterial source tracking

database

collection of molecular fingerprints generated by various enzymatic means

DNA

deoxyribonucleic acid-DNA is the genetic
repository for all cells

fingerprint

a pattern that is generated for an organism
or population which is distinct to that
organism or population based upon the
technique selected - a unique identifiable pattern

library

collection of bacterial isolates to be used
for fingerprinting analysis

MST

microbial source tracking

PCR

polymerase chain reaction - a method for
copying specific sequences of DNA, with
repeated replication of a sequence resulting in formation of millions of copies
in a short period of time

RNA

ribonucleic acid - RNA is involved in all
stages of protein synthesis and many play
regulatory roles in the cell

rRNA

ribosomal RNA - RNA which is specific to
ribosome genesis and its subunit 16S is
used for phylogenetic analysis

Literature Cited
(1) USEPA. The quality of our Nation’s waters; EPA-841-S-00-001;
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water: Washington, DC, 2000.
(2) Water Quality Planning and Management Regulation. Federal
Register 1985, 50, 1779.
(3) Revisions to the Water Quality Planning and Management
Regulation and Revisions to the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Program in Support of Revisions to the Water
Quality Planning and Management Regulation. Federal Register
2000, 65, 43662.
(4) Effective Date of Revisions to the Water Quality Planning and
Management Regulation and Revisions to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Program in Support of Revisions
to the Water Quality Planning and Management Regulations;
and Revision of the Date for State Submission of the 2002 List
of Impaired Waters. Federal Register 2001, 66, 53048.
(5) USEPA. Protocol for developing pathogen TMDLs; EPA-841-R00-002; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Water: Washington, DC, 2001.
(6) Edwards, D. R.; Larson, B. T.; Lim, T. T. JAWRA 2000, 36, 711721.
(7) Heinonen-Tanski, H.; Uusi-Kämppä, J. Water Sci. Technol. 2001,
43, 143-146.
(8) Trevisan, D.; Vansteelant, J. Y.; Dorioz, J. M. Water Res. 2002,
36, 275-283.
(9) Edwards, D. R.; Coyne, M. S.; Vendrell, P. F.; Daniel, T. C.; Moore,
P. A., Jr.; Murdoch, J. F. JAWRA 1997, 33, 413-422.
(10) Howell, J. M.; Coyne, M. S.; Cornelius, P. J. Environ. Qual. 1995,
24, 411-419.
(11) Novotny, V.; Sung, H.-M.; Bannerman, R.; Baum, K. Journal
WPCF 1985, 57, 339-348.
(12) Schiff, K.; Kinney, P. Water Environ. Res. 2001, 73, 534-542.
(13) Blankenship, K. Bay Journal 1996, 6, 1.
(14) Simmons, G.; Waye, D.; Herbein, S.; Myers, S.; Walker, E.
Presented at Virginia Water Research Symposium 2000, Blacksburg, VA, Younos, T., Poff, J., Eds.; VWRRC Special Report SR19-2000, 2000.
(15) Meals, D. Water Sci. Technol. 2001, 43, 175-182.
(16) Hill, V. R.; Sobsey, M. D. Water Sci. Technol. 2001, 44, 215-222.
(17) Barrett, E. C.; Sobsey, M. D.; House, C. H.; White, K. D. Water
Sci. Technol. 2001, 44, 177-182.
(18) Lombardo, L. A.; Grabow, G. L.; Spooner, J.; Line, D. E.; Osmond,
D. L.; Jennings, G. D. Section 319 Non-point source national
monitoring program: Successes and recommendations; NCSU
Water Quality Group, Biological and Agricultural Engineering
Department, NC State University, EPA report (preprint), Raleigh,
2000; http://www5.bae.ncsu.edu/programs/extension/wqg/
section319/frontcover.html.
(19) Sinton, L. W.; Finlay, R. K.; Hannah, D. J. N. Z. J. Mar. Freshwater
Res. 1998, 33, 323-348.
(20) Hagedorn, C. Presented at Microbiological Source Tracking
Workshop, Irvine, CA, Weisberg, S., Ed.; Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project, 2002.
(21) Hagedorn, C.; Robinson, S. L.; Filtz, J. R.; Grubbs, S. M.; Angier,
T. A.; Reneau, R. B., Jr. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 55225531.
(22) Theron, J.; Cloete, T. E. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2002, 28, 1-26.
(23) Xiao, L.; Alderisio, K.; Limor, J.; Royer, M.; Lall, A. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2000, 66, 5492-5498.
(24) Xiao, L.; Singh, A.; Limor, J.; Graczyk, T.; Gradus, S.; Lall, A.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 1097-1101.
(25) Furuse, K. In Phage Ecology; Goyal, S., Gerba, C., Bitton, G.,
Eds.; Wiley: New York, 1987.
VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002 / ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 9 5287



(26) Brion, G. M.; Meschke, J. S.; Sobsey, M. D. Water Res. 2002, 36,
2419-2425.
(27) Donaldson, K. A.; Griffin, D. W.; Paul, J. H. Water Res. 2002, 36,
2505-2514.
(28) Ley, V.; Higgins, J.; Fayer, R. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2002, 68,
3455-3461.
(29) Elhmmali, M.; Robers, D.; Evershed, R. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2002, 34, 39-46.
(30) Standley, L.; Kaplan, L.; Smith, D. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000,
34, 3124-3130.
(31) Ellender, R. D.; Middlebrooks, B. L.; Wang, S.; Rebarchik, D.;
Grimes, D. J. Presented at Microbiological Source Tracking
Workshop, Irvine, CA, Weisberg, S., Ed.; Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project, 2002.
(32) Gordon, D. Microbiology 2001, 147, 1079-1085.
(33) Gordon, D. M.; Bauer, S.; Johnson, J. R. Microbiology 2002, 148,
1513-1522.
(34) Geldreich, E. E.; Kenner, B. A. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed. 1969,
41, R336-352.
(35) Geldreich, E. E. J. Am. Water Works Assoc. 1970, 62, 113-120.
(36) Feachem, R. Water Res. 1976, 9, 689-690.
(37) Weather, D. W. F.; Mara, D. D.; Oragui, J. In Biological indicators
of water quality; James, A., Evison, L., Eds.; John Wiley and
Sons: Toronto, 1979; pp 21/21-21/27.
(38) Hill, M. J.; Drasar, B. S.; Aries, V.; Crowther, J. S.; Hawksworth,
G.; Williams, R. E. O. Lancet 1971, 1, 95-100.
(39) Evison, L.; James, A. Prog. Water Technol. 1975, 7, 57-66.
(40) McFeters, G. A.; Bissonnett, G. K.; Jezeski, J. J.; Thomson, C. A.;
Stuart, D. C. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1974, 27, 823-829.
(41) Smith, R. J.; Twedt, R. M. J. Water Pollut. Control Fed. 1971, 43,
2200-2207.
(42) Anderson, S. A.; Turner, S. J.; Lewis, G. D. Water Sci. Technol.
1997, 35, 325-331.
(43) Ludwig, W.; Seewaldt, E.; Kilpper-Balz, R.; Schleifer, K. H.;
Magrum, L.; Woese, C. R.; Fox, G. E.; Stackebrandt, E. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 1985, 131, 543-551.
(44) Kaspar, C.; Burgess, J.; Knight, I.; Colwell, R. R. Can. J. Microbiol.
1990, 36, 891-894.
(45) Hagedorn, C., Virginia Tech, http://www.bsi.vt.edu/biol•4684/
BST/BST.html, (Accessed 05/28/02).
(46) Harwood, V. J.; Whitlock, J.; Withington, V. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2000, 66, 3698-3704.
(47) Wiggins, B. A. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1996, 62, 3997-4002.
(48) Wiggins, B. A.; Andrews, R. W.; Conway, R. A.; Corr, C. L.; Dobratz,
E. J.; Dougherty, D. P.; Eppard, J. R.; Knupp, S. R.; Limjoco, M.
C.; Mettenburg, J. M.; Rinehardt, J. M.; Sonsino, J.; Torrijos, R.
L.; Zimmerman, M. E. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 34833486.
(49) Graves, A.; Hagedorn, C.; Teetor, A.; Mahal, M.; Booth, A.; Reneau,
R. B., Jr. J. Environ. Qual. 2002, 31, 1300-1308.
(50) Parveen, S.; Murphree, R.; Edmiston, L.; Kaspar, C.; Portier, K.;
Tamplin, M. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1997, 63, 2607-2612.
(51) Whitlock, J.; Jones, D.; Harwood, V. J. Water Res. 2002, 36, 42734282.
(52) Gruntzig, V.; Nold, S.; Zhou, J.; Tiedje, J. M. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2001, 67, 760-768.
(53) Suzuki, M. T.; Taylor, L. T.; DeLong, E. F. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
2000, 66.
(54) Altschul, S.; Madden, T.; Schäffer, A.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Miller,
W.; Lipman, D. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997, 25, 3389-11825.
(55) Maidak, B.; Cole, J.; Lilburn, T.; Parker, C., Jr.; Saxman, P.; Farris,
R.; Garrity, G.; Olsen, G.; Schmidt, T.; Tiedje, J. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2001, 29, 173-174.
(56) Grimont, F.; Grimont, P. Ann. Inst. Pasteur Microbiol. 1986,
137, 165-175.
(57) Olsen, J.; Brown, D.; Baggesen, D.; Bisgaard, M. Epidemiol. Infect.
1992, 108, 243-260.
(58) Popovic, T.; Bopp, C.; Olsvik, O.; Wachsmuth, K. J. Clin. Microbiol.
1993, 31, 2474-2482.
(59) Tamplin, M.; Jackson, J.; Buchrieser, C.; Murphree, R.; Portier,
K.; Ganger, V.; Miller, L.; Kaspar, C. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
1996, 62, 3572-3580.
(60) Parveen, S.; Portier, K.; Robinson, K.; Edmiston, L.; Tamplin, M.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 3142-3147.

5288 9 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY / VOL. 36, NO. 24, 2002

(61) Carson, C. A.; Shear, B. L.; Ellersieck, M. R.; Asfaw, A. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 1503-1507.
(62) Hartel, P.; Summer, J.; Hill, J.; Collins, V.; Entry, J.; Segars, W.
J. Environ. Qual. 2002, 31, 1273-1278.
(63) Bernhard, A., E.; Field, K., G. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66,
1587-1594.
(64) Bernhard, A., E.; Field, K., G. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66,
4571-5474.
(65) Bouzar, H.; Jones, J. B.; Stall, R. E.; Louws, F. J.; Schneider, M.;
Rademaker, J. L.; de Bruijn, F. J.; Jackson, L. E. Phytopathology
1999, 89, 328-335.
(66) Judd, A.; Schneider, M.; Sadowsky, M.; de Bruijn, F. J. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 1993, 59, 1702-1708.
(67) Sadowsky, M.; Kinkel, L.; Bowers, J.; Schottel, J. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 1996, 62, 3489-3493.
(68) Johnson, J.; Clabots, C.; Azar, M.; Boxrud, D.; Besser, J.; Thrun,
J. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2001, 39, 3452-3460.
(69) Kidd, M.; Atherton, J.; Lastovica, A.; Louw, J. J. Clin. Microbiol.
2001, 39, 1833-1839.
(70) de Moura, A.; Irino, K.; Vidotto, M. Avian Dis. 2001, 45, 173181.
(71) Dombek, P. E.; Johnson, L. K.; Zimmerley, S. T.; Sadowsky, M.
J. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66, 2572-2577.
(72) Muyzer, G.; Hottenträger, S.; Teske, A.; Wawer, C. In Molecular
Microbial Ecology Manual; de Bruijn, F., Ed.; Kluwer Academic
Publishers: Boston, 1996; Vol. 3.4.4, pp 1-23.
(73) Muyzer, G.; Brinkhoff, T.; Nübel, U.; Santegoeds, C.; Schäfer,
H.; Wawer, C. In Molecular Microbial Ecology Manual; de Bruijn,
F., Ed.; Kluwer Academic Publishers: Boston, 1998; Vol. 3.4.4,
pp 1-27.
(74) Zoetendal, E.; Akkermans, A.; Akkermans-vanViliet, W.; de Visser,
A.; de Vos, W. Microbial Ecology Health Disease 2001, 13, 129134.
(75) Simpson, J. M. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 2001.
(76) Farnleitner, A. H.; Kreuzinger, N.; Kavka, G. G.; Grillenberger,
S.; Rath, J.; Mach, R. L. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66, 13401346.
(77) Buchan, A.; Alber, M.; Hodson, R. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2001,
35, 313-321.
(78) van Belkum, A.; Struelens, M.; Visser, A.; Verbrugh, H.; Tibavrenc,
M. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2001, 14, 547-560.
(79) Dicuonzo, G.; Gherardi, G.; Lorino, G.; Angeletti, S.; Battistoni,
F.; Bertuccini, L.; Creti, R.; Di Rosa, R.; Venditti, M.; Baldassarri,
L. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2001, 201, 205-211.
(80) Iyoda, S.; Wada, A.; Weller, J.; Flood, S.; Schreiber, E.; Tucker,
B.; Watanabe, H. Microbiol. Immunol. 1999, 43, 803-806.
(81) Samadpour, M.; Stewart, J.; Steingart, K.; Addy, C.; Louderback,
J.; McGinn, M.; Ellington, J.; Newman, T. J. Environ. Health
2002, 64, 16-20.
(82) Kariuki, S.; Gilks, C.; Kimari, J.; Obanda, A.; Muyodi, J.; Waiyaki,
P.; Hart, C. A. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 472-476.
(83) Blears, M.; Grandis, S.; Trevors, J. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotech.
1998, 21, 99-114.
(84) Savelkoul, P. H. M.; Aarts, H. J. M.; de Haas, J.; Dijkshoorn, L.;
Duim, B.; Otsen, M.; Rademaker, J. L. W.; Schouls, L.; Lenstra,
J. A. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1999, 37, 3083-3091.
(85) Vos, P.; Hogers, R.; Bleeker, M.; Reijans, M.; van der Lee, T.;
Hames, M.; Frijters, A.; Pot, J.; Peleman, J.; Kuiper, J.; Zabeau,
M. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996, 23, 4407-4414.
(86) Guan, S.; Xu, R.; Chen, S.; Odumeru, J.; Gyles, C. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2002, 68, 2690-2698.
(87) Wang, R.-F.; Beggs, M. L.; Robertson, L. H.; Cerniglia, C. E. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 2002, 213, 175-182.
(88) Edberg, S.; Melson, J. Evaluation of indicator bacteria using
molecular fingerprinting; AWWA Research Foundation and
American Water Works Association: Denver, 2001.

Received for review July 26, 2002. Revised manuscript received October 7, 2002. Accepted October 9, 2002.
ES026000B

