Vol 4/No. 7

I

Status 2 Page 76

GASTROENTERITIS RELATED TO FOOD
ANDIOR BEACH BATHING
Mark J Ferson, Specialist in-charge, Public Health Unit,
Eastern Sydney Area Health Service
Margaret Williamson, Public Health Officer, Western
Sydney Public Health Unit
Christine Cowie, Environmental Health Project Officer,
Epidemiology and Health Services Evaluation Branch

EPIDEMIC CURVE

A

Families with more than one case
each letter denotes one tamily)

NoTIFIcATIoN
November 14, 1991 a general practitioner
notified the Eastern Sydney Area Public Health
On
Unit of seven cases of gastroenteritis among eight-year-old
children who had attended a private birthday party. Some
of the children had also attended a school picnic the next
day. The mother hosting the party was keen to find the
cause of illness and had kept any portions remaining from
the foods served at the party. A list of guests and their
telephone numbers were provided.

PREUMINARY INVESTIGATION
The remaining food samples, including avocado dip,
hommos dip, taramosalata dip, frankfurts and dried
apricots, were collected and delivered to the Food
Microbiology section of the Division of Analytical
Laboratories. Bacteriological examination of foods consisted
of standard plate count and quantitation of faecal coliforms,
F coli and salmonellas.
A telephone questionnaire was given to parents of
the children at the party. The questionnaire sought
demographic information and asked about foods which
had been eaten at the party, and presence and onset of any
symptoms of enteric illness. It became apparent that some
of the children had also attended a school picnic at Parsley
Bay (a Sydney Harbour recreational area) the day after the
birthday party. The picnic had been organised for Year 3
pupils of a local primary school, and their families.
Activities at the picnic included swimming in Parsley Bay.
Cases were defined as persons who had experienced at least
one of the symptoms of nausea, vomiting or diarrhoea, with
onset during the period November 10-18, 1991 (the day
after the party until no further cases were reported).

SECOND-STAGE INVESTIGATION
During the initial investigation it became apparent that a
similar illness was reported by classmates of the index cases
in the fortnight before the party. This raised the possibility
that the cases first reported were caused by clustering of
an infection already circulating before the party took place.
A second questionnaire was administered to those children
(and their parents and siblings) in the school class who had
not already been interviewed.
The study population comprised the children who attended
the private birthday party or who were in the class for
whom the picnic had been organised, their parents and
siblings. Cases and controls were taken from this population
and compared for presence at the party and at the picnic.
Separate case-control analyses were performed among
individuals who attended the party to determine whether
consumption of a specific food was a risk factor for illness,

V0L4/No.7

30 31 1 2 3 4 5 5 7 8 9 10 11 12 113 14 IS IS 17 lB
mr rd
BNee

I

I 1ON

and among those at the picnic to determine if swimming
with immersion of the face or the consumption of a specific
food was a risk factor. Odds ratios and tests for differences
in proportion were calculated using Epihifo software.
The Water Board was approached to determine whether
any information existed on microbial pollution of harbour
waters at the picnic site.
RESULTS
Food analysis
The frankfurts showed evidence of early spoilage, while the
avocado and hominos dips showed low-level contamination
with faecal organisms, consistent with use and duration of
storage after opening.
Case description
Fifteen persons fulfilled the case definition with onset
after the party, and a further six had onset of illness in
the 11 days before the party. Of the 21 persons reporting
a compatible illness, there were nine females and 12 males.
Six cases were in adults and 15 in children, eight of whom
were in the Year 3 class under study. Nausea was reported
most commonly (17 cases), followed by diarrhoea (13),
abdominal discomfort (13), vomiting (12), headache (11) and
fever (10). The illness lasted between eight and 48 hours.
In no case was a stool sample collected, so a microbiological
diagnosis was not available.
Incubation period analysis
When the 21 persons with enteric symptoms with onset
from October 30 to November 18 were examined, it was
possible to identi households in which secondary cases
occurred four to seven days after a previous household case
(see Figure 2). This illness, which affected 12 persons from
six households, was classified as the 'long-incubation'
illness, and presumably was propagated by person-to-person
spread. Seven cases, with onset of illness after the party,
were not associated with secondary family cases and were
classified as 'short-incubation' cases. Although the patterns
of symptoms were similar, diarrhoea was more frequent in
the 'long-incubation' (11 of 14) than in the 'short-incubation'
illness (two of seven, two-tailed Fisher exact test P=0.055).
Case-control studies
Questionnaires were available for 70 individuals -39
children and 31 adults. In the case-control analyses, two

76



case definitions were tested, both applying to onset dates
from November 10-18. The first definition was of all illness
occurring irrespective of incubation period, of which there
were 15 cases. The second, more restrictive, definition
excluded 'long-incubation' illnesses, and left seven cases.
When an association between illness and party attendance
was examined the odds ratios suggested that presence at
the party was a significant exposure factor for illness. When
all 15 cases were considered the odds ratio was calculated as
6.7 (95% C.I. 1.6-29.4), and rose to 14.7 (95% CI. 1.9-138)
when the case definition was restricted to the seven 'shortincubation' cases.
Two adults and 14 children attended the birthday party eight cases and eight controls. Consumption of frankfurts,
taramosalata dip, hommos dip, avocado dip, doughnuts,
whipped cream or birthday cake were not significantly
associated with illness using either case definition.
Odds ratios for picnic attendance were not significant using
either case definition, and no common foods were eaten at
the picnic. But among the 30 persons who attended the
picnic, eight of 18 who swam reported illness, while none
of 12 who did not swim reported illness. Thus, swimming
in Parsley Bay was significantly associated with illness
(two-tailed Fisher exact test, P=0.01).
Recreational waters analysis
Although it is not carried out routinely, the Water Board
agreed to perform bacteriological examination on Parsley
Bay water. Tests on samples collected in mid-January
showed significant contamination of bathing waters with
faecal coliforrns and faecal streptococci from storrnwater
discharges. The high faecal bacterial counts found at this
time were most likely explained by sewage pollution of the
stormwater system after heavy rains. However, no rainfall
was recorded in the three days before the picnic in
November. Thus stormwater-related faecal contamination
of bathing waters at Parsley Bay was unlikely to have
occurred at the time of the picnic.
DISCUSSION
The investigation was initially confined to the families
of children who had attended the birthday party on
November 9, 1991. However, two complicating factors
rapidly became apparent: many of the children had also
attended a class picnic the next day; and similar illnesses
had occurred in contacts several days before either event.
At this point the study population was expanded to include
children in the picnic class (whether or not they attended
the picnic) and their household contacts. Analysis of data
suggests there were two separate illnesses, which could be
distinguished by incubation period and by symptomatology.
Diarrhoea was more commonly reported in the 'longincubation' illness than in the other cases. The association
between party attendance and illness was strengthened
when cases of 'long-incubation' illness were removed from
the analysis. This finding supports the hypothesis that
the 'long-incubation' illness, spread by person-to-person
transmission, was distinct from the other cases which may
have had an incubation period as short as 12-48 hours amid

VoI.4/No.7

may have been truly related to an exposure at the birthday
party or picnic.
The clinical features of a brief self-limiting illness, with
vomiting more marked than diarrhoea, reports of fever and
headache, and an onset 12-48 hours after exposure were
strongly suggestive of infection with calicivirus, Norwalk
virus or a related small round virus'. Laboratory
confirmation of these infections is difficult to obtain, as
diarrhoeal stool specimens are required and symptoms have
usually resolved by the time an investigation is initiated.
As well, there are no public laboratory facilities in NSW
for virological examination of foodstuffs.
Case-control methods were used to examine causal factors
for illness. Attendance at the party was found to be a risk
factor for illness, suggesting the source may have been
either a highly infectious person at the party or a
contaminated food. None of the subjects interviewed
admitted to gastrointestinal symptoms on the day of the
party. However, transmission from individuals before the
onset of symptoms has been shown to occur in rotavirus
infection2 and has been suggested for Norwalk virus
infection2. The number of persons attending was too small
to implicate a single foodstuff as the vehicle for foodhorne
illness. Bacteriological analysis of avocado and honmios dips
suggested some degree of contamination with human faecal
organisms, but it was not possible to determine if this
occurred during processing, as a result of use by the party
guests or due to delay in transport to the laboratory.
If contamination with faecal bacteria was a marker for
contamination with human enteric viruses, then this may
provide an explanation for the outbreak.
Swimming at the picnic, not presence at the picnic, was
found to be a second significant risk factor for illness.
Although a clear association between the presence of human
enteric viruses in recreational waters and illness has not yet
been proven4, it maybe hypothesised that the bathing
waters were contaminated with one of the small round
viruses, which are known to remain viable iii seawater
(G Grohniann, personal communication). Unfortunately, it
was not possible to arrange virological analysis of the water,
although this facility may in future be provided by the
Water Board (G Grohmann, personal communication). In
the absence of heavy rainfall it was not possible to explain
faecal pollution of the stormwater system by sewage
overflows, although illegal cross-connections between
sewerage and stormwater piping would have the same
effect. However, enteric viruses are able to survive in
marine sediments for many months and may be disturbed
and recirculated into the bathing waters5. These
mechanisms cannot be ruled out as a cause of faecal
microbial pollution of the beach waters.
CONCLUSION
A cluster of cases of mild gastroenteritis was reported due
to concern about a possible foodborne source of illness. Cases
occurred after, and may have been related to attendance at,
a private birthday party, swimming at a class picnic or both.

77



Gastroenteritis
Continued from page 77
These events took place on two consecutive days of one
weekend. Clinical features of the illness were suggestive
of infection with calicivirus or a related virus. However,
no clinical specimens were obtained for pathological
confirmation and it was not possible to test food or water
samples for the presence of pathogenic viruses.
Although the outbreak described in this report was a
relatively minor one, the investigation of a much larger
outbreak is likely to be hampered by the same dilficulties.
A mechanism to give the NSW public health network rapid
access to laboratory services for virological examination of
water and foodstuffs is needed to aid the investigation of
future outbreaks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Dr Alan Stark, University of NSW, for
statistical advice and helpful comments on the manuscript.
1. Cubitt WC. The candidate caliciviruses. In: Bock E, Whelan J (eds).
Novel diarrhoea viruses (Ciba Foundation symposium 128). Chichester
1987; 136-137.
2. Pickering LK, Bartlett AV, Reves RR, Morrow A. Asymptomatic
excretion of rotavirus before and after rotavirus diarrhoea in children
in day care centers. JPediatr 1988; 112:361-365.
3. Centers for Disease Control. Viral agents of gastroenteritis: public
health importance and outbreak management. MMWR 1990; 39(RR-5);
6-7.
4. Birch C, Gust!. Sewage pollution of marine waters: the risks of viral
infection. Med JAust 1989; 151:609610.
5. Ellender RD, Anderson JB, Dunbar RB. Role of sediment in the
persistence and transport of enteric viruses in the estuarine
environment. In: Rao CV, Melnick JL, cdv. Human viruses in sediments,
sludges and soils. Florida, CRC Press 1987; 37-55.

PUBLIC HEALTH EDITORIAL
The Bulletin's editorial advisory panel is as follows:
Dr Sue Morey, Chief Health Officer, Public Health
Division, NSW Health Department; Professor Stephen
Leeder, Director, Department of Community Medicine,
Westmead Hospital; Professor Geoffrey Berry, Head,
Department of Public Health, University of Sydney; Dr
Christine Bennett, General Manager, Royal Hospital for
Women; Dr Michael Frnmmer, Deputy Director,
Epidemiology and Health Services Evaluation Branch,
NSW Health Department; Ms Jane Hall, Director,
Centre for Health Economics Research and Evaluation;
and Mr Michael Ward, Manager, Health Promotion
Unit.
The editor is Dr George Rubin. Director, Epidemiology
and Health Services Evaluation Branch, NSW Health
Department.
The Bulletin aims to provide its readers with population
health data and information to motivate effective public
health action. Articles, news and comments should be
1,000 words or less in length and include the key points
to be made in the first paragraph. Please submit items
in hard copy and on diskette, preferably using
WordPerfect 5.1, to the editor, Public Health Bulletin,
Locked Mail Bag 961, North Sydney 2059. Facsimile
(02) 391 9232.
Design - Health Public Affairs Unit, NSW Health
Department. Suggestions for improving the content
and format of the Bulletin are most welcome.
Please contact your local Public Health Unit to obtain
copies of the NSW Public Health Bulletin.

VoI.4/No.7

General practice database
' Continued from page 75
widely publicised and the database has been used for a
range of purposes. These include:

.

Production of a document listing doctors willing
to receive referrals from the Area Health Service.
When a district hospital Accident and Emergency
Department was closed, the database was used to
provide residents with a listing of GPs in their area.
The Area Health Service sends a monthly
newsletter to all GPs. Art average of four Area
Health Service departments or community service
groups and two GPs a month request information
be included with the newsletter.

The Public Health Unit produces a bulletin
to inform GPs of infectious disease outbreaks,
including reports from the local general practice
sentinel surveillance network.
At the start of an outbreak of hepatitis A the PHU
used the database to contact all GPs in the Area.
They received information within 72 hours.

The database has been used as a sampling frame
for several research studies.
Community health and health promotion
professionals have used the database to contact GPs
serving particular ethnic groups or geographical
areas.

A profile of general practice in Central Sydney has
been produced to assist in planning the provision of
services in the Area.
DISCUSSION
A comprehensive database of GPs has a wide range of uses
at a local level, many of which may enhance the health of
the community by allowing timely and locally appropriate
information to be disseminated to practitioners.
The frequent requests for information to be sent to GPs
indicate a desire, on the part of Area Health Service staff
and community groups, to liaise with family doctors in order
that available services be used most efficiently. This
communication is not just one way, as the newsletter is also
circulated to more than 400 salaried and visiting medical
staff in the Area and to each clinical department at RPAH,
thus increasing awareness of the activities of local GPs.
Compilation of a database at a local level is not particularly
time-consuming or expensive. The estimated cost of compiling
the database for Central Sydney (which has a population of
330,000), excluding the cost of software development but
including all data collection costs and salaries, was $4,000.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge Marina Heisdingen,
Sumi Nair, Sarda Borusch and Lorraine Winchester who
assisted with data collection and data m.anagement. The OP
Liaison Committee of Royal Prince Alfred Hospital has
provided invaluable advice and support.
1. Deeble J. Medical services through Medicare. Canberra: National
Health Strategy Unit, Department of Health, Housing and Community
Services, Feb 1991. (NHS background paper No 2.)
2. Douglas RM. General practice financing: report of a 'think tank'.
Med JAu.st 1992; 156:38-42.
3, Saltman DC, Mant A. General practitioner databases in Australia.
Med JAust 1992; 156:16-20.

78

