Marine Pollution Bulletin 52 (2006) 264–268
www.elsevier.com/locate/marpolbul

Risk perception bias, self-reporting of illness, and the validity
of reported results in an epidemiologic study of recreational
water associated illnesses
Jay M. Fleisher
a

a,*

, David Kay

b

Nova Southeastern University, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Masters of Public Health Program, 3200 South University Drive,
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33328, USA
b
River Basin Dynamics and Hydrology Research Group, IGES, University of Wales, Aberystwyth, SY23 3DB, UK

Abstract
Epidemiologic studies of water associated illness often have to rely on self-reported symptoms of the outcome illness(es) under study.
Individual participantÕs perception of risk, in theory, can aﬀect the validity of self-reported symptoms. The magnitude and eﬀect of possible ‘‘risk perception bias’’ was evaluated as part of a series of randomized trials designed to assess infectious disease transmission via
exposure to marine recreational waters with modest sewage contamination. All study subjects were blinded to both their individual indices of exposure and the outcome illnesses under study. Of the ﬁve outcome illnesses studied, the eﬀect of ‘‘risk perception bias’’ only
eﬀected one: skin ailments. Although analysis of crude rates of skin ailments showed the exposed group (bathers) to be 3.5 times more
likely to report skin ailments relative to the non-exposed (non-bathers), when the data was stratiﬁed by any perceived health risk of bathing in such waters, this association was shown to be spurious in nature. Bathers having pre-conceived notions of any health risk due to
the exposure were 10.63 times more likely to report skin ailments relative to the unexposed (non-bathers) (95% CI 2.36–47.8, P = 0.0002),
while bathers without any pre-conceived notion of risk were no more likely to report skin ailments relative to non-bathers (OR = 0.60,
95% CI 0.11–3.24, P = 0.71). Further stratiﬁcation by exposure grouping showed bathers with pre-conceived notions of excess risk to be
4.78 times more likely to report skin ailments relative to bathers without any notion of excess risk (95% CI 1.04–21.86, P = 0.03), while
among non-bathers those with pre-conceived notions of risk were 3.70 times less likely to report skin ailments relative to non-bathers
without any pre-conceived notion of risk (95% CI 0.70–19.60, P = 0.10). This study shows that ‘‘risk perception bias’’ can be strong
enough to lead to spurious associations in the presence of self-reported symptoms, and should be controlled for in future epidemiologic
studies of recreational water associated illnesses and other water associated environmental exposures where the use of self-reported symptoms cannot be avoided.
Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Risk perception; Water quality; Epidemiologic methods; Bias; Recreational water; Infectious disease

1. Introduction
Epidemiologic studies of environmental exposures
sometimes have to rely on self-reported symptoms of the
outcome illness under study. Self-reporting of symptoms
usually are necessary where the symptoms of the illness un-

*

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 954 262 1515; fax: +1 954 262 3257.
E-mail address: jmﬂeish@nova.edu (J.M. Fleisher).

0025-326X/$ - see front matter Ó 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2005.08.019

der study are subjective in nature, and where objective
medical diagnostic procedures are not possible and/or
prove either impractical or too costly. It is a well-known
fact that the use of self-reported symptoms in prospective
studies can be subject to bias caused by either diﬀering participant perceptions of what constitutes a particular symptom or set of symptoms, failure to report symptoms, or
various psychological characteristics of the study participant. Despite the inherent bias, the self-reporting of symptoms continues to be used in epidemiological studies of



J.M. Fleisher, D. Kay / Marine Pollution Bulletin 52 (2006) 264–268

water associated environmental exposures (e.g., viral
water-borne illnesses (Payment et al., 1991, 1994) recreational water-borne illnesses (Cabelli et al., 1982; Fleisher
et al., 1993, 1996; Kay et al., 1994 etc.)).
In the environmental health setting where the exposure
being studied is known or even vaguely perceived by individual participants, one psychological factor that can aﬀect
the validity of self-reported illness is the participantÕs perceived perceptions of the risk of exposure. Blinding subjects
to the nature of the illness being studied in prospective epidemiological study designs does not necessarily control for
such ‘‘perception bias’’. Health risks due to environmental
exposures have received much media attention over the
past decade or so. Such media attention can inﬂuence risk
perception among individual study participants. Therefore,
individual perception of risk can be either exposure-speciﬁc
or nebulous in nature based on a small amount of knowledge, often inadequately or inappropriately reported by the
news media. This sort of media exposure can inﬂuence individual study participantÕs perception of the risk of any
environmental exposure in a very general and broad manner. Therefore, blinding of study participants to the outcome illness under study would not necessarily control
for any pre-conceived general or speciﬁc notions of risk
attributable to environmental exposures in general, or if
known, the environmental exposure being studied.
In the context of conducting perspective environmental
epidemiologic studies, our study both identiﬁes and quantiﬁes this phenomenon, and will show that individual ‘‘risk
perception bias’’ among study participants blinded to the
outcome illnesses under study can be severe enough to produce spurious associations.
It must be emphasized that the concepts and results reported in this study are not restricted to the environmental
exposure they were derived from, but are applicable to any
environmental exposure where self-reported illness among
study participants becomes integrated into the epidemiologic design of the study. The data used to explore the eﬀect
of what we label ‘‘risk perception bias’’ were derived from
four previously reported randomized trials of infectious illnesses associated with exposure to marine recreational
water contaminated with domestic sewage (Fleisher et al.,
1993, 1996; Kay et al., 1994). A Brief description of study
methods and results follow.
Four separate trials within England and Wales were
conducted during the summers of 1989–1992 at four separate marine bathing locations (study sites A, B, C, D).
Exposure to diﬀering amounts of sewage contamination
among the study participants exposed to marine recreational waters was measured using standard bacteriologic
indices of domestic sewage contamination of marine
waters. All study locations passed current European Community ÔImperativeÕ criteria governing marine bathing
waters (Council of the European Economic Communities,
1976) as well as current USEPA bacteriological criteria
governing marine recreational waters (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 1986). The study locations

265

were suﬃciently distant from each other in order to identify
possible site-speciﬁc diﬀerences in risk.
The study design called for the randomization of healthy
volunteers into exposed (bather) and unexposed (non-bather)
groups; the rigid control of the time and location of individual bather exposure; and the extensive monitoring of
bacteriologic indices of sewage contamination (i.e., the
actual measure of exposure). This study design allowed
bacteriological indices of sewage exposure to be assigned
to each individual bather within 15 min of exposure and
within a maximum of approximately 10 m of the place of
exposure; and the use of extensive pre- and post-trial-day
structured interviews designed to identify and control for
non-water-related risk factors and/or confounders for the
outcome illnesses under study. Study participants were
blinded to the outcome illnesses under study. Participants
that were randomized into the exposed group (bathers)
on each of the four trial days were blinded to their speciﬁc
level of exposure (i.e., their level of exposure to bacteriological indices of sewage exposure and thus their implied level
of exposure to domestic sewage).
Five outcome illnesses were studied (gastroenteritis,
Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness-ICD 9-461-466; 480(Benenson, 1990), eye, ear, and skin ailments). Bathers
were found to be at excess risk of gastroenteritis, Acute
Febrile Respiratory Illness, eye and ear ailments relative
to non-bathers at all four study locations. In addition, clear
dose–response relationships were demonstrated between
bather exposure to increasing levels of bacteriological indices of sewage contamination, and increased risk of gastroenteritis, Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness, and ear
infections. Interestingly, skin ailments were associated with
the exposure (bathing) at only one of the four study locations (Site D), but not with exposure to increasing indices
of sewage contamination at any of the study locations.
These series of trials, however, attracted considerable
media attention and, thus, study participants were exposed
to both electronic and print media reporting prior to the
commencement of each of the trials. In order to assess for
possible bias caused by media reporting, a series of ten questions designed to identify possible ‘‘perception bias’’ were
dispersed throughout the ﬁnal follow-up questionnaire.
Nine of the 10 questions where ‘‘sham’’ questions with only
question 3, answer 3 used to test for possible perception
bias. The ‘‘sham’’ questions were included in order to
‘‘blind’’ the participant to the nature of our inquiry. This
question was then used to assess any ‘‘risk perception bias’’
on the four outcome illnesses found to be associated with
bathing in marine waters contaminated with domestic sewage. Of these illnesses, only skin ailments at Site D showed a
strong association with this question used to identify possible ‘‘risk perception bias’’. We now present the results of
our analyses designed to identify and quantify any ‘‘perception bias’’ observed to be operating on the observed association between skin ailments and exposure to recreational
waters contaminated with domestic sewage at this particular study location (Site D).



266

J.M. Fleisher, D. Kay / Marine Pollution Bulletin 52 (2006) 264–268

2. Methods
Site-speciﬁc incidence rates of skin ailments among 469
bathers and 595 non-bathers were assessed at all four study
locations for bathers (exposed) and non-bathers (unexposed). The Pearson v2 statistic was used to assess any
bather vs. non-bather diﬀerences in the incidence of skin
ailments within individual study locations, while the Mantel–Haenszel summary statistic was used to assess statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the incidence of skin
ailments among bathers vs. non-bathers at all study sites
combined. To assess for risk at high levels of the measure
of the exposure (i.e., exposure to high levels of bacteriological indices of sewage contamination), rates of reported
skin ailments among non-bathers and bathers at quartiles
of indicator organism exposure were assessed for all four
study locations combined and for the one site showing
bathers to be at higher risk for skin ailments relative to
non-bathers (Site D). Chi-square analysis was then used
to identify any statistically signiﬁcant trends among the
observed incidence of skin ailments among non-bathers
vs. bathers at increasing quartiles of bacteriologic indices
of sewage exposure at site D. A trend was considered signiﬁcant only if the chi-square-for-trend statistic remained
statistically signiﬁcant, with and without inclusion of the
non-bather (unexposed) group. This insures diﬀerences
between the unexposed or reference group, and the lowest
exposure grouping among bathers does not unduly inﬂuence the n2-for-trend statistic (Maclure and Greenland,
1992; Breslow and Day, 1980). Where no trend was identiﬁed, the rates of skin ailments reported by bathers at Site D
exposed to the highest quartile of sewage exposure were
compared to rates among bathers in the lowest quartile
of sewage exposure using chi-square analysis.
Relationships between the excess risk of skin ailments
reported at site D and the question used to identify possible
‘‘risk perception bias’’ was conducted using univariate chisquare analyses. Where a statistically signiﬁcant association (P < 0.05) was observed with this questions, simple
stratiﬁcation methods were then used to explore the nature
of the association.
3. Results
Table 1 shows the questions that were included in the
follow-up instrument. This series of ten questions was primarily designed to assess an individual study participantÕs
perception of health risks associated with swimming without letting the participant know the exact nature of the
possible risks, and thus not inﬂuence the participantÕs responses in any manner. As such, all but 1 (question 3, answer 3) of the questions listed in Table 1 were designed to
draw attention away from the issue of health risks, and are
thus irrelevant to assessing possible ‘‘risk perception bias’’.
In addition, to further safeguard against any possible bias
introduced by the process of inquiring about the participantÕs perception of health risk, the questions listed in

Table 1
Questions used to assess the presence of possible perception bias in the
reporting of symptoms among study participants
1. Do you consider water-related activities dangerous?
2. Have you heard anything regarding the way beaches are maintained in
the UK?
3. Have you heard anything regarding the cleanliness of bathing waters in
the UK?
What speciﬁc problems have you heard about? (can check more
than 1)
Oil spills—Objects ﬂoating in water—
—
Health risk
Chemical pollution—Sewage pollution—N/A—
Have you ever refused to go bathing?
Have you ever become ill soon after bathing in waters in the UK?
Have you ever gone to the beach feeling ill?
Did feeling ill on these occasions prevent you from entering the water
to go bathing?
8. When at the beach, do you bathe or enter the water?
9. How frequently do you immerse your head while bathing?
10. How often do you get sunburned while at the beach?
4.
5.
6.
7.

Table 1 were randomly inserted among the 76 additional
questions that comprised the ﬁnal follow-up questionnaire.
Table 2 shows site-speciﬁc crude rates of skin ailments
among all bathers vs. all non-bathers. Inspection of Table
2 shows no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in reported
skin ailments among bathers vs. non-bathers at three of
the four study locations (sites A, B, C). Site D, however,
showed bathers to have signiﬁcantly higher rates of skin
ailments relative to non-bathers (OR = 3.58, 95% CI
1.44–8.87, P = 0.004). No signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the rates
of skin ailments among bathers vs. non-bathers were observed when the data from the four study locations were
combined (P = 0.23). Comparisons of the rates of skin ailments among all non-bathers vs. bathers (all study locations combined) at quartiles of sewage exposure showed
no statistically signiﬁcant trends in ailment rates vs. indices
of sewage contamination, nor any statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerences among bathers exposed to the highest quartile
of indices of sewage contamination vs. those exposed to
the lowest quartile (Table 3).
Table 4 shows the results of the analysis of reported skin
ailments among non-bathers and bathers at Site D by
quartiles of sewage exposure. Table 4 shows a statistically
signiﬁcant trend in reported skin ailments among nonbathers and bathers at quartiles of increasing sewage exposure (P trend = 0.001). However, when the non-bather
group was removed from the analysis, there is little
Table 2
Site-speciﬁc rates of skin ailments
Site

Site
Site
Site
Site

Rate/100

A
B
C
D

All sites combined
a

Bathers

N

Non-bathers

N

P

5.7
6.5
13.0
14.4

106
92
146
125

1.6
8.7
15.6
4.5

122
150
147
156

0.15
0.55
0.52
0.004

10.4

469

7.8

575

0.23a

P value from the Mantel–Haenszel summary statistic.



J.M. Fleisher, D. Kay / Marine Pollution Bulletin 52 (2006) 264–268
Table 3
Skin ailments among non-bathers vs. bathers at quartiles of indices of
sewage contamination (all sites combined)
Exposure status

N

Rate/100

P (trend)

P (Q1–Q4)a

Non-bathers
Bathers 0–14b
Bathers 15–27
Bathers 28–50
Bathers 51–158

575
101
122
109
137

7.8
8.9
13.9
10.0
8.8

0.31

0.97

a

Tests for statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences among bathers in highest
vs. lowest quartile of fecal streptococci exposure.
b
Range of indices of sewage contamination (per 100 ml of sample)
comprising each quartile of exposure.

Table 4
Skin ailments among non-bathers vs. bathers at quartiles of indices of
sewage contamination Site D only
a

Exposure status

N

Rate/100

P (trend)

P (Q1–Q4)

Non-bathers
Bathers 0–10b
Bathers 11–23
Bathers 24–33
Bathers 34–70

156
49
20
25
31

4.5
8.2
20.0
16.0
19.4

0.001

0.17

Bathers only P (trend) = 0.17c
a

Tests for statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences among bathers in highest
vs. lowest quartile of fecal streptococci exposure.
b
Range of indices of sewage contamination (per 100 ml of sample)
comprising each quartile of exposure.
c
Comparison between bather groupings only.

evidence of a trend in risk of skin ailments among bathers
at increasing quartiles of sewage exposure (P = 0.17).
Moreover, rates of reported skin ailments among bathers
in the lowest quartile of sewage exposure did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those reported by bathers in the highest
quartile of sewage exposure (P = 0.17). Therefore, it would
seem that the observed excess risk of skin ailments among
bathers at Site D was unrelated to indices of sewage exposure and thus unrelated to sewage pollution.
Table 5 is a list of non-bathing-water-related risk factors
used as potential confounders of the relationship between
skin ailments and bather status observed at Site D. Chisquare analysis of the non-water-related risk factors shown
in Table 5, when applied to the data obtained at Site D
only, showed no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences
Table 5
Non-water-related risk factors for skin ailments
A skin rash, ulcer or sore anywhere on the body persisting for more than
24 h within 3 weeks prior to initial interview
Itching and irritation anywhere on the body persisting for more than 24 h
within 3 weeks prior to initial interview
Use of steroids within 4 weeks prior to initial interview
Bathing within 3 days prior to the trial day or bathing within 7 days
subsequent to the trial day
Bathing within 3 weeks subsequent to the trial day
Usual frequency of sunburn
Skin ailments in household within 3 weeks subsequent to trial day that
preceded illness in volunteer

267

Table 6
Skin ailments at Site D stratiﬁed by any knowledge that bathing in the
united kingdom might present a possible health risk
Knowledge status

N

% Reporting
skin ailments

Odds
ratio

95% Conﬁdence
interval

Bathers
Did not have knowledge
Had knowledgea

42
83

4.8
19.3b

1.00
4.78

–
1.04–21.86

Non-bathers
Did not have knowledge
Had knowledgea

65
91

7.7c
2.2

1.00
0.27

–
0.051–1.44

a

Based on the study participant indicating that they had ‘‘heard’’ that
bathing in UK waters might present a ‘‘health risk’’.
b
P = 0.03.
c
P = 0.10.

(P > 0.05) among bathers vs. non-bathers, or among bathers reporting skin ailments vs. bathers who did not, for any
of the non-water-related risk factors listed in Table 5.
Analysis of the question asked to assess any potential
‘‘risk perception bias’’ among bathers vs. non-bathers, or
among ill vs. non-ill bathers, indicated that at Site D bathers who reported skin ailments were more likely to have
heard that bathing in UK waters might present a possible
health risk relative to bathers who did not report skin ailments (Table 1, Question 3) (OR = 4.78, 95% CI 1.04–
21.86, P = 0.03). Table 6 shows an analysis of the eﬀect
of such knowledge when stratiﬁed by bather status (bathers
or non-bathers). Inspection of Table 6 shows that bathers
with general knowledge that bathing might cause health
eﬀects were more likely to report skin ailments relative to
bathers without such knowledge (OR = 4.78, 95% CI
1.04–21.86, P = 0.03), while non-bathers with such knowledge were less likely to report skin ailments relative to
non-bathers without such knowledge (OR = 0.27, 95% CI
0.05–1.44, P = 0.10). Table 7 shows the impact of this
source of confounding in a slightly diﬀerent perspective.
Table 7 presents an analysis of reported skin ailments
among bathers vs. non-bathers at Site D stratiﬁed by general knowledge of a bathing-related health risk. Inspection
Table 7
Skin ailments at Site D stratiﬁed by any knowledge that bathing waters in
the united kingdom might present a possible risk to healtha
Exposure
status

N

% Reporting
skin ailments

Odds
ratio

95% Conﬁdence
interval

Study participants who indicated they have not heard anything regarding
the possibility that bathing in UK waters presents a possible risk to health
Non-bathers
65
7.7b
1.00
–
Bathers
42
4.8
0.60
0.11–3.24
Study participants who indicated they have heard that bathing in UK waters
might present a possible risk to health
Non-bathers
91
2.2
1.00
–
10.63
2.36–47.81
Bathers
83
19.3c
a
Based on the study participant indicating that they had ‘‘heard’’ that
bathing in UK waters might present a ‘‘health risk’’ (Bathers vs. nonbathers).
b
P = 0.71.
c
P = 0.0002.



268

J.M. Fleisher, D. Kay / Marine Pollution Bulletin 52 (2006) 264–268

of Table 7 again shows strong association between such
general knowledge and the reporting of skin ailments.
Inspection of Table 7 shows that among study participants
aware of possible bathing-associated health risk, bathers at
Site D were almost eleven times more likely to report symptoms relative to non-bathers (OR = 10.63, 95% CI
2.36–47.81, P = 0.0002), while among study participants
reporting no knowledge of health risks, bathers were again
less likely to report skin ailments (OR = 0.60, 95% CI 0.11–
3.24, P = 0.71).
4. Discussion
The analyses presented indicate that the observed diﬀerence in reported skin ailments among bathers vs. non-bathers observed at the Site D study location is subject to
substantial amounts of reporting bias among study participants. The nature of this bias seems to be due to ‘‘risk perception bias’’ acting on bathers who had some form of
broad knowledge that the exposure could cause health
eﬀects, and thus be more likely to ﬁnd and report skin
ailments. An alternative explanation is that this group of
bathers exaggerated their symptoms, and thus reported
conditions that others would not categorize as true skin
ailments. The observation that non-bathers with knowledge about possible bathing-related health eﬀects reported
symptoms of skin ailments less frequently than non-bathers without such knowledge, coupled with the fact that
no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the reported
incidence of skin ailments was observed among bathers
vs. non-bathers who had no knowledge about possible
bathing-associated health risks, provides strong evidence
that the apparent association between skin ailments and
exposure to marine waters contaminated with domestic
sewage initially observed at Site D was a result of participant ‘‘perception bias’’ and thus spurious in nature. The
fact that no statistically signiﬁcant excess incidence of skin
ailments was found among bathers at the three other study
locations nor when the data from all four study locations
were combined further supports the notion of a spurious
association resulting from ‘‘perception bias’’ among study
participants, and thus was not due to exposure-related
eﬀects.
The main purpose of this report is to both identify and
quantify the eﬀect of any pre-conceived notions of the risk
an exposure can have on individual study participants and
thus on the validity of reported results. The ‘‘risk perception
bias’’ identiﬁed and quantiﬁed herein was based on a study
of domestic sewage derived recreational water-associated
infectious illnesses. However, the phenomenon described is

by no means limited to the bathing water exposure in which
it was described, but remains relevant to any prospective
epidemiological water associated study where the exposure
assessed is perceived to have an accompanying health risk
(regardless of the validity of this assumption) among individual study participants when illness is self-reported.
Therefore, ‘‘risk perception bias’’ can occur even where
study participants only have the most rudimentary idea of
the actual health eﬀects of a particular environmental exposure. As such, the procedures described in this report should
be implemented in epidemiological studies of water associated illnesses where self-reporting of symptoms cannot be
avoided. The severity of the bias reported in this study
shows that incorporation of methods to identify and quantify possible ‘‘risk perception bias’’ is clearly warranted in
such situations.
References
Benenson, A.S., 1990. Control of Communicable Disease in Man.
American Public Health Association, Washington, DC.
Breslow, N.E., Day, N.E., 1980. Statistical Methods in Cancer
ResearchThe Analysis of Case-Control Studies, vol. 1. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY.
Cabelli, V.J., Dufour, A.P., McCabe, L.J., Levin, M.A., 1982. Swimmingassociated gastroenteritis and water quality. Am. J. Epidemiol. 115,
606–616.
Council of the European Economic Communities, 1976. Council directive
of 8 december, 1975 concerning the quality of bathing waters. Oﬃcial
J. Eur. Commun., Directive No. 76/160/EEC, Brussels, Belgium.
Fleisher, J.M., Jones, F., Kay, D., Stanwell-Smith, R., Wyer, M., Morano,
R., 1993. Water and non-water-related risk factors for gastroenteritis
among bathers exposed to sewage-contaminated marine waters. Int. J.
Epidemiol. 22, 698–708.
Fleisher, J.M., Kay, D., Dalmon, R.L., Jones, F., Wyer, M.D., Godfree,
A.F., 1996. Marine waters contaminated with domestic sewage: nonenteric illnesses associated with bather exposure in the united kingdom.
Am. J. Public Health 86, 1228–1234.
Kay, D., Fleisher, J.M., Salmon, R.L., Jones, F., Wyer, M.D., Godfree,
A.F., Zelenauch-Jacquotte, A., Shore, R., 1994. Predicting likelihood
of gastroenteritis from sea bathing: results from randomized exposure.
Lancet 344, 905–909.
Maclure, M., Greenland, S., 1992. Tests for trend and dose response:
misinterpretations and alternatives. Am. J. Epidemiol. 135, 96–
104.
Payment, P., Franco, E., Fout, G.S., 1994. Incidence of norwalk virus
infections during a prospective epidemiological study of drinking waterrelated gastrointestinal illness. Can. J. Microbiol. 40, 805–809.
Payment, P., Richardson, L., Siemiatycki, J., Dewar, R., Edwardes, M.,
Franco, E., 1991. A randomized trial to evaluate the risk of
gastrointestinal disease due to consumption of drinking water meeting
current microbiological standards. Am. J. Public Health 81, 703–
708.
United States Environmental Protection Agency, 1986. Ambient water
quality criteria for bacteria—1986. Oﬃce of Water Regulations and
Standards Criteria and Standards Division, Washington, DC.

