Marine Waters Contaminated with
Domestic Sewage: Nonenteric Illnesses
Associated with Bather Exposure in
the United Kingdom

iiiiiIiiiImE.rni

Jai, M. Fleishet; PhD, Dav-id Kav, PhD, Roland L. Salmon, MFPHM, Frank Jonies,
MSc, Mark D. Wver, PhD, and Alan F. Godfree, BSc

Introduction
The possible transmission of infectious disease via contact with recreational
waters contaminated with domestic sewage has been the subject of 11 previously
published major prospective epidemiological studies.1' By far the most consistent
finding has been an increased risk of
gastroenteritis among bathers relative to
nonbathers. To a lesser extent. prcviouslyr
published studies have reported bathers
to be at excess risk of respiratory. car, cye
and skin ailments. although the definition
of each of these ailments and the associatcd risks have varied widely among
studies.l 74. lI
To date. gastroenteritis is the only
single discasc entitv in which a mathematical model of a dose-response relationship
between increased exposurc to bacteriological indices of sewage pollution (indicator organisms) and subsequent risk of
Other
illness has been reported." 1-'
studies have reported dose-response relationships between increasing exposure to
indicator organisms and exccss illness
among bathers, but these studies had to
combinc two or more etiologically distinct
illnesses in order to derivc the relationships that they rcported.f'">'"
Any mathematical modcl of a doscresponsc relationship that relates indicator organism exposure to a grouping of
two or more unrelated infectious illnesses
carrics the assumption that all of the
distinct underlying infectious agcnts causing the illnesses have the same relationship with the indicator organism used in
the model or that all the disease entities
included in the grouping are due to the
same infectious agent. There is little
biological evidence to support either of
thcse assumptions. In addition. interpreting such models bccomes problematic.

This is because such models assumc that
the bather exposed to a particular indicator organism density is at equal risk of
contracting each of the ailments that
compose the grouping. Since the groupings used in previously reported mathematical models combined distinct conditions (e.g., eye or skin disorders) with
other illnesses that may have different
long-term outcomes and complications
(e.g.. gastroenteritis or respiratory illness
in the very young or very old), the
usefulness of such models becomes questionable.
We now report the results of four
intervention follow-up studies we conducted to explore the relationship between bather exposure to increasing levels
of domestic sewage pollution (as measured by indicator organism exposure)
and subsequent risk of acute febrile
respiratory illness and eve. ear, and skin
ailments. Our findings regarding swimming-associated enteric illness have been

published elsewhere.-'34
Jav M. Fleisher is with the Department of
Preventive Medicine and Community Health.
State University of New York. Brooklvn. and

the Center for Research into Environment and
Health. University of Leeds. Leeds. United
Kingdom. David Kav. Frank Jones. and Mark
D. Wver are with the Center for Research into
Environment and Health. Leeds. Roland L.
Salmon is with the PHLS Communicable
Disease Center. C ardiff. Wales. United Kingdom. Alan F. Godfree is with Acer Environmental. Runcorn. United Kingdom.
Requests for reprints should he senit to
Jay M. Fleisher. PhD. Department ot Preventive Medicine and Communitv Heallth. State
University of New York. Health Sciences
Center at Brooklvn. 45() Clarkson Ave. Box 43.
Brooklvn. NY 1 12(03-2(098.
This paper was accepted Ma 3. 1996.
See related annotation bv Telford (p 1 203)
in this issue.

September 1996. Vol. 86. No. 9



Swimming and illness

Methods
General
A detailed description of the study
methods used in each of the four intervention follow-up studies has been published
elsewhere.13 Briefly, four study locations
located in the United Kingdom were
used. The study locations were sufficiently
distant from each other so that possible
site-specific differences in the risk of
bathing-associated illnesses could be assessed.15 All study locations met European Community mandatory bacteriological marine bathing-water quality criteria.
Adult volunteers (> 18 years) were recruited in population centers close to
specific study locations. There was no
duplication of volunteer cohorts between
study locations. Ethical clearance for all
four studies was granted by the Royal
College of Physician's Committee for
Research on Healthy Volunteers. Informed consent was obtained from all
study volunteers in such a manner as to
keep volunteers blinded to the nonenteric outcome illnesses under study.
Four separate studies were conducted in
four successive bathing seasons during
the summers of 1989 through 1992.
Healthy volunteers were randomized
into bather and nonbather groups; the
duration and place of individual bather
exposure was rigorously controlled; indicator organism exposure was assigned to
individual bathers within 15 minutes of
actual exposure and within a maximum of
10 meters of the actual point of exposure;
and each volunteer was given extensive
pre- and post-trial-day interviews designed to identify, quantify, and control
for non-water-related risk factors and/or
possible confounders for the outcome
illnesses under study. The interviews were
as follows: initial interview 2 or 3 days
prior to each trial, trial day interview, first
follow-up interview at 7 days, and second
follow-up at 3 weeks post-trial day). Study
subjects did not know their exposure
status (bather or nonbather) until they
reported to the beach. Bathers were
encouraged to spend at least 10 minutes
in the water and were required to completely immerse their heads 3 times
during exposure. No bathing caps or other
protective gearwas allowed. "Beach supervisors" recorded the duration of exposure
of each bather. Nonbathers were kept in a
roped-off area distant from the water, and
"beach supervisors" ensured that no
nonbather entered the water.

September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9

Water quality was sampled at 30minute intervals for the following five
bacteriological indices of water quality:
total coliform, fecal coliform, fecal streptococci, total staphylococci, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.14 Samples were collected
in the surf zone, in waters approximately
1 m deep, and in waters approximately
1.3 m to 1.4 m deep (chest depth). At each
of these three sampling locations, samples
were taken 30 cm below the water's
surface. It should be noted that chest
depth was the actual location of bather
exposure.

Study Population
A total of 1528 study participants
aged 18 or older completed the initial
interview, of which a total of 1329 attended the beach. Of these, 56 either
failed to comply with their randomization
status (n = 23) or were lost to follow-up.
This left a total of 1273 study participants,
which constitutes an overall follow-up
rate of 83.3% over the four intervention
trials. An additional 57 bathers lacked
indicator organism exposure data and
were excluded from further analysis.
Therefore, a total of 1216 participants
(548 bathers and 668 nonbathers) were
eligible for inclusion in subsequent analyses. When stratified by study location, the
number of bathers and nonbathers constituting the study cohort were as follows:
Langland Bay (1989), 120 bathers vs 133
nonbathers; Moreton (1990), 101 bathers
vs 164 nonbathers; Southsea (1991), 172
bathers vs 186 nonbathers; and Southend
on Sea (1992), 155 bathers vs 185 nonbathers. The mean age of the final bather
cohort was 31.65 years vs 32.12 years for
the final nonbather cohort. Fifty-four
percent of bathers were male while 46.5%
of nonbathers were male.

Outcome Illnesses orAilments
Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness
Previously published epidemiological studies have failed to rigorously define
respiratory symptoms according to some
known classification of disease. To avoid
this problem, we decided, prior to any
statistical analysis, to classify respiratory
illness as listed in the American Public
Health Association's Control of Communicable Diseases in Man.16 Therefore, the
symptoms used in this report to define
respiratory illness constitute the disease
entity acute febrile respiratory illness
(International Classification of Diseases

[ICD], 9th revision, codes 461 through

466;480).16
The infectious agents suspected as
being responsible for this disease are
numerous viral agents. Among these viral
agents are enteroviruses and adenoviruses that are discharged in the feces and
that have been implicated in outbreaks of
this illness among people bathing in
swimming pools.16
Therefore, prior to any data analysis
and in accordance with ICD criteria,
volunteers were classified as having acute
febrile respiratory illness if they experienced at least one of the symptoms listed
in each of the following three categories:
(1) fever; (2) headache and/or bodyaches
and/or unusual fatigue and/or anorexia;
(3) sore throat and/or runny nose and/or
dry or productive cough. To help ensure
that each symptom reported was part of a
single illness, we counted only symptoms
reported at a single follow-up interval
(i.e., either at the 7-day follow-up interview or between 8 and 21 days after each
trial date).

Ear, Eye, and Skin Ailments
The term "ear ailment" includes any
reported incidence of ear pain, with or
without accompanying discharge. The
term "eye ailment" includes any reported
incidence of sore, red eyes with or without
concurrent discharge. The term "skin
ailment" includes all cases of skin rash,
skin ulcers and/or sores, and skin irritation accompanied by itching.

tcalAnalysis
Comparisons of Bathers and

St

Nonbathers

The primary purpose of this study
was to identify possible dose-response
relationships among bathers exposed to
varying levels of domestic sewage (as
measured by indicator organism exposure) and subsequent risk of nonenteric
illness and to identify possible thresholds
of effect (indicator organism exposures at
which bathers experienced no excess risk
of contracting a nonenteric illness relative
to nonbathers). Therefore, the nonbather
cohort was used primarily to provide a
baseline upon which to estimate thresholds of effect.
The success of randomization was
assessed by comparing the distribution of
non-water-related risk factors for the
illnesses under study among bathers vs
nonbathers. This was done by univariate
chi-square analysis. If randomization was
American Journal of Public Health 1229



Fleisher et al.

Analyses Restricted to Bathers Only
TABLE 1-Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness among Nonbathers vs Bathers at
Quartiles of Fecal Streptococci Exposure, the United Kingdom
Exposure Status

No.

Rate/100

Nonbathers
Bathers, by exposureb
0-14
15-27
28-50
51-158
Bathers only

665

3.0

124
138
126
158
...

4.0
5.8
1.6

P (Trend)

P (04 Bathers vs
Nonbathers)a
.007

.043
...
...

7.6
...

.36

...

Note. Water quality samples were taken at chest depth. We assessed for the following
non-water-related risk factors or possible confounders: age (by 10-y intervals); gender; total no.
people in household; illness in household 2 weeks prior to initial interview; flu-like symptoms
among study participants within 4 weeks prior to initial interview; smoking; additional bathing
within 3 days prior to 3 weeks after trial day; illness in household within 3 weeks subsequent to
trial day; and respiratory illness among household members within 3 weeks subsequent to trial
day that preceded illness in study participant.
aComparison between bathers at highest quartile of fecal streptococci exposure vs nonbathers.
bRange of fecal streptococci densities (per 100 ml of sample) composing each quartile of exposure.

When the series of univariate chisquare analyses, as discussed above, identified an association between a particular

outcome illness among nonbathers vs
bathers at increased exposure to indicator
organism densities, multiple logistic modeling was used to evaluate relationships
between indicator organism exposure and
illness while controlling for extraneous
non-water-related risk factors or confounders among ill vs non-ill bathers. The
non-water-related risk factors or confounders included in each logistic regression model were identified via prior
chi-square analysis of the distribution of
these factors among ill vs non-ill bathers.
Three different multiple logistic regression models were fitted to the data in
order to further define possible thresholds
of effect. The models are as follows:

(1) Ln odds of illness among bathers

successful for any non-water-related
risk factor or possible confounders, multiple logistic regression was used to assess
whether the effect of such failure confounded any differences in the risk of
illness among nonbathers vs bathers. It
should be noted that any additional
exposure (bathing) within 3 days pre- to 3
weeks post-trial day was identified for
each study participant. Where a statistically significant difference was observed
(P < .05) among the proportion of bathers vs nonbathers reporting such additional exposure, an appropriate term was
entered into the multiple logistic model in
order to control for possible confounding.
A second multiple logistic regression
analysis was also computed that excluded
all bathers and nonbathers who reported
additional bathing exposure. The results
of this restricted analysis was then compared with the result of the unrestricted
logistic regression analysis described
above. In all instances, the restricted
analyses yielded results that closely
matched those derived from the unrestricted analyses.
Chi-square analysis was then used to
identify any statistically significant trends
among the observed incidence of a particular outcome illness among nonbathers vs
bathers at quartiles of indicator organism
exposure. Trend was assessed with the
Mantel-Haenszel test for linear trend. A
trend was considered statistically significant (P < .05) only if the chi-square for
trend statistic remained statistically signifinot

cant with and without the inclusion of the

nonbather group. This ensures that differ-

1230 American Journal of Public Health

ences between the reference group and
the group with the lowest exposure do not

unduly influence the chi-square for trend
statistic.'7-'9 A second series of trend
analyses compared rates of illness among
nonbathers vs bathers at 20- or 50-unit
intervals of increasing indicator organism
exposure. The Mantel-Haenszel chisquare for trend was again used to assess
statistically significant trends, while the
Pearson chi-square was used to determine
the grouping at which indicator organism
exposure rates of illness became statistically significantly greater (P < .05) among
bathers than among nonbathers. (Where
expected cell size was less than 5.0,
Fisher's Exact Test was used in lieu of the
Pearson chi-square.) Again, a trend was
considered statistically significant only if
the chi-square for trend statistic remained
statistically significant with and without
the nonbather reference group. These
series of trend analyses were conducted
for the data obtained for each of the five
indicator organisms assayed for, at each
of the three sampling depths used, and
for each of the outcome illnesses. The
analyses were intended to provide some
insight into possible "thresholds of effect"
to be further evaluated through the use of
a series of multiple logistic regression
models.
Where a statistically significant trend
was observed only with the inclusion of
the nonbather series, rates of illness
among nonbathers were compared with
rates of illness among bathers in each
quartile of indicator organism exposure.

=

Log,0 (IOE

+

1)

+ cdxl + .o.. ixi

(2) Ln odds of illness among bathers
=

X Log10 (IOE
+

TH)

ctlXl +

...

ciXi

(3) Ln odds of illness among bathers
=

+ ,

a Logl, (IOE

+

1)

Logl0(IOE TH)
+ cdxl +

...

aiXi

where
IOE

=

TH

=

Xi

=

Indicator-organism exposure of
the individual bather (per 100 ml
of sample) modeled as a continuous variable.
Postulated "threshold" indicator
organism exposure derived from
bather vs nonbather comparisons
described earlier.
Non-water-related risk factors or
possible confounders for the particular outcome illness.

Model 1 would therefore represent a
situation in which there was no threshold
of effect; Model 2 would imply a threshold
of effect, and Model 3 would represent a
situation that implies no threshold of
effect but that allows for different slopes
in the dose-response relationship to occur
above and below the hypothesized "thresholds." It should be noted that the postulated threshold term (IOE TH) for

September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9



Swimming and Illness

TABLE 2-Logistic Regression Analysis of the Three Postulated Models for Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness, Bathers Only
Model 1: Log10 (FS +1)
OR

95% Cl

Log10 (FS +1)b
Logl0 (FS -59)b
Genderc
Illness in householdd
Agee

2.51

0.79, 7.92

...

1.35, 8.07
0.83, 8.35
0.51, 1.05
= 192.34

Model 3:
Log10 (FS +1) + Log10 (FS -59)a
95% Cl

95% Cl

OR

...
...
1.26, 5.05
2.53
1.38, 8.33
3.39
0.90, 9.16
2.87
0.50,1.03
0.72
-2 Log L = 189.38

1.21
2.30

OR

Variable

3.31
2.63
0.73
-2 LOg L

Model 2: Logl0 (FS -59)a

3.40
2.84
0.72

-2 LOg

0.34, 4.40
0.93, 5.73
1.38, 8.35
0.89, 9.09
0.50,1.03
L = 189.28

Note. OR = odds ratio; Cl = confidence interval.
a(FS -59) term results in maximum fecal streptococci density of zero for fecal streptococci exposure less than 59 or log10 [(fecal streptococci exposure
+ 1) -59] for fecal streptococci exposure greater than or equal to 59.
bFS = fecal streptococci density per 100 ml of sample.
cReference group = males.
dlncludes illness in household occurring within 3 weeks after the study day with or without information regarding whether illness preceded reported illness
among individual study participants (bathers).
eModeled continuously in intervals of 10 years.

Models 2 and 3 above was coded as
follows: zero for indicator organism exposures less than the postulated threshold
value and Loglo[(IOE + 1) TH] for
indicator organism exposures equal to or
greater than the postulated threshold
value.
To test which of the above three
models was most appropriate for the data
under analysis, we computed the log
likelihood statistic'9 for each model. We
contrasted Models 1 and 2 with Model 3
using a hierarchical (backward elimination) strategy. In this manner, multiple
logistic regression analysis was used to
further test the validity of any "threshold
of effect" found via previous univariate
chi-square analysis of the bather versus
nonbather cohorts.
It should be noted that a set of
indicator variables was included in each
logistic model to identify possible sitespecific effects on the occurrence of the
outcome illnesses under study, as well as a
term that assessed the effect of duration
of exposure. Again, we assessed the effect
of additional unsupervised bathing from 3
days pre- to 3 weeks post-trial day via
inclusion of an appropriate term in the
logistic regression models and via repeating the logistic regression analyses described above restricted to bathers who
reported no such additional bathing exposure. In all instances, the restricted analyses yielded results that closely matched
those of the unrestricted analyses. A
backward, stepwise elimination strategy
was employed to identify and control for
significant non-water-related risk factors
or confounders in each logistic regression
model.

TABLE 3-Ear Ailments among Nonbathers vs Bathers at Quartiles of Fecal
Coliform Exposure, the United Kingdom

-

September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9

Exposure Statusa

No.

Rate/1 00

Nonbathers
Bathers, by exposureb
0-40
41-79
80-133
134-661
Bathers only

636

2.8

120
113
152
134
...

6.7
6.2
5.9
14.2
...

P (Trend)

<.0001

.042c

Note. Water quality samples were taken at chest depth. We assessed for the following
non-water-related risk factors or possible confounders: age; gender; illness in household within 2
weeks prior to initial interview; history of ear problems; ear infection within 4 weeks prior to initial
interview; additional bathing within 3 days prior to 3 weeks after trial day; illness in household
within 3 weeks subsequent to trial day; and ear ailments among household members within 3
weeks subsequent to trial day that preceded ailment in study participant.
aAnalysis excludes six bathers missing fecal coliform exposure data.
bRange of fecal coliform densities (per 100 ml of sample) composing each quartile of exposure.
COomparison among bather groupings only.

Results
Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness
Twenty-seven of 548 bathers, and 20
of 668 nonbathers, met the criteria for
having acute febrile respiratory illness.
These numbers do not include 2 bathers
and 3 nonbathers who were classified as
having this illness on an actual trial day
and were thus excluded from subsequent
analyses. Analysis of trend among nonbathers vs bathers at quartiles of exposure
and at 20-unit intervals of increasing
indicator-organism exposure was carried
out for each of the five indicator organisms assayed for at each of the three
sampling depths used. Only fecal streptococci exposure derived from samples

taken at chest depth showed any evidence
of a statistically significant trend (range of
exposure 0 through 158 fecal streptococci
per 100 ml).
Table 1 shows rates of illness among
nonbathers vs bathers at increasing quartiles of fecal streptococci exposure. (A
table showing rates of illness among
nonbathers vs bathers at 20-unit intervals
of increasing exposure is available from
the authors.) Inspection of Table 1 shows
a statistically significant trend across quartiles of fecal streptococci exposure when
the nonbather group was included in the
analysis (P = .04), but this trend lost
statistical significance when the analysis
.36). When
was restricted to bathers (P
bather rates of illness in each quartile of
=

American Journal of Public Health 1231



Fleisher et al.

TABLE 4-Multiple Logistic Regression Analysis of the Three Postulated Models for Ear Ailments, Bathers Only

Model 3:

Variable

Logl0 (FC +1)b
Loglo (FC -100)b

Previous ear infectionc
Bathing within 3 days prior
to study day

Log10 (FC +1) + Log1o (FC -100)a
95% Cl
OR

Model 2: Log10 (FC -100)a
95% Cl
OR

Model 1: Log10 (FC +1)
95% Cl
OR

...
1.13, 2.15

...
1.56
7.19
2.38

2.05
0.94, 4.47
.....
1.93, 27.03
7.23
1.08, 4.73
2.26

0.90
1.62
7.15
2.39

1.90, 27.23
1.13, 5.00

Note. OR = odds ratio; Cl = confidence interval.
a(FC -100) term results in maximum fecal coliform density of zero for fecal coliform exposure less than 100 or
fecal coliform exposure greater than or equal to 100.
bFC = fecal coliform density per 100 ml of sample.
CPrior ear infection = having an ear infection within 4 weeks prior to initial interview.

exposure were compared with the rates of
illness among nonbathers, only those

bathers exposed to the highest quartile of
exposure (51 through 158 fecal streptococci per 100 ml of sample) showed a
statistically significant increase in the risk
of acquiring acute febrile respiratory
illness relative to nonbathers (odds ratio
[OR] = 2.65; 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 1.19, 5.48, P = .007). Similarly,
comparison of illness rates among nonbathers vs bathers at 20-unit intervals of
fecal streptococci exposure showed that
excess risk of illness among bathers
relative to nonbathers did not occur until
exposure to approximately 60 or more
fecal streptococci organisms (OR = 3.92;
95% CI = 1.59, 9.49, P = .0014).
None of the applicable non-waterrelated risk factors or possible confounders (see note to Table 1) confounded the
observed difference in illness rates among
nonbathers vs bathers exposed to increasing fecal streptococci exposure, as shown
in Table 1.
We then used multiple logistic regression analysis to evaluate any doseresponse relationship between illness
among bathers vs exposure to increasing
fecal streptococci density while controlling for possible confounding by the
non-water-related risk factors. Since the
univariate analysis provided evidence that
bather rates of illness did not exceed
those of nonbathers until exposure to 60
fecal streptococci, three separate
multiple logistic regression models were
evaluated: (1) a "no-threshold" model,
(2) a model that assumes a threshold of
effect at exposure to 60 or more fecal
streptococci, and (3) a model that allows
for different dose-response relationships
above and below the theorized "threshold

or more

1232 American Journal of Public Health

value" (60 fecal streptococci per 100 ml).
Table 2 shows the results of these analyses.
The goodness of fit of each of the
three models shown in Table 2 was
assessed with the log likelihood statistic.19
These analyses yielded the following
results: There is a nearly statistically
significant decrease in the goodness of the
fit of the model (P = .08) when the
"threshold" term (Log,oFS 59) is removed from the model containing both
the Logio(FS + 1) and Log10 (FS 59)
terms (Model 3). In contrast, removal of
the "nonthreshold" term Loglo(FS + 1)
from Model 3 clearly did not decrease the
fit of the model (P = .75). This suggests
that the model containing only the
Loglo(FS 59) term (Model 2, Table 2) is
the most appropriate logistic regression
model for the data under analysis.
Inspection of Model 2 in Table 2
shows a statistically significant doseresponse relationship between fecal streptococci exposure and the occurrence of
acute febrile respiratory illness among
bathers. The logistic model showed no
indication of any site-specific effects on
outcome, no effect of duration of exposure on outcome (mean duration of
-

-

-

exposure among ill vs non-ill bathers was

13.0 min vs 14.6 min, respectively; P = .26),
and no statistically significant interaction
between fecal streptococci exposure and
the other independent variables in the
model (gender, illness in household, or
age). Lack of such interaction makes all
factors listed in Model 2, Table 2 independent predictors of acute febrile respiratory illness.

EarAilments
Out of a total of 548 bathers and 668
nonbathers eligible for inclusion in this

1.88, 27.12
1.13, 5.04

-2 Log L = 265.58

-2 Log L = 265.62

-2 Log L = 269.17

0.14, 0.98

0.99, 2.66

logl0 [(fecal coliform exposure + 1) -100] for

analysis, 23 bathers and 32 nonbathers
were excluded from further analysis because of reported ear ailments within 3

days of the trial day. Of 525 bathers, 43
met the criteria for having an ear ailment
postexposure, as did 18 of 636 nonbathers.

Again, bathers were initially divided
into quartiles of indicator organism exposure, and separate analyses were conducted for each indicator organism assayed for and at each of the three waterquality sampling depths used. Only fecal
coliform organisms derived from samples
taken at chest depth showed statistically
significant trends in the incidence of ear
ailments with increasing quartiles of fecal
coliform exposure, with and without inclusion of the nonbather group (Table 3).
Since the range of fecal coliform levels
varied from 0 through 661 organisms per
100 ml of sample among estimates derived
from samples taken at chest depth, we
decided to group bather exposure by units
of 50 fecal coliform organisms to further
refine any dose-response relationship
with respect to a possible "threshold" of
effect. This analysis also showed a statistically significant increasing trend in the
incidence of ear ailments vs increasing
fecal coliform exposure among bathers,
with and without the inclusion of the
nonbather group (table available from the
authors). Both trend analyses showed
clear evidence that increased risk of ear
infection did not increase significantly
(P < .05) until bather exposure to approximately 100 or more fecal coliform organisms. None of the factors listed in the note
to Table 3 were found to confound the
observed difference in the rates of ear
infection among nonbathers vs bathers at
increasing quartiles or 50-unit intervals of
fecal coliform exposure, as shown inTable 3.
September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9



Swimming and Illness

PROBABILITY

PROBABILITY
0.16
0.14

0.2

0.15

20

2

3

350 4

45

5

6

0.12
0.08
0.06/
0.04'
0.02

0.05
60

1

70

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650
FECAL COLIFORM DENSITY

80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160
FECAL STREPTOCOCCI DENSITY

Note. The plot is derived from logistic regression Model 2, Table 2.
Results have been adjusted for age, gender, and household illness.
Density = fecal streptococci/100 ml.

Note. The plot is derived from logistic regression Model 2, Table 4.
Results have been adjusted for prior bathing and prior ear infection.
Density = fecal coliform/100 ml.

FIGURE 1 -Bathers' probability of acquiring acute
febrile respiratory illness through exposure
to Increasing levels of fecal streptococci.

FIGURE 2-Bathers' probability of acquiring ear
infections through exposure to increasing
levels of fecal coliforms.

We then used multiple logistic regression analysis to evaluate dose-response
relationships between ear ailments among
bathers at exposure to increasing levels of
fecal coliform while controlling for possible confounding by non-water-related
risk factors. Again, three separate logistic
regression models were evaluated: (1) a
"no-threshold" model, (2) a model that
assumes a threshold of effect at exposure
to 100 or more fecal coliform, and (3) a
model that allows for different doseresponse relationships above and below
the theorized "threshold value" (100 fecal
coliform per 100 ml).
To assess for possible site-specific
effects on the distribution of ear ailments
among bathers, we entered a set of
indicator variables into each of the above
regression models, as well as a term that
assessed the effect of duration of exposure. We found no site-specific effects and
no statistically significant interaction between the effect of fecal coliform exposure and the other main effects. Mean
duration of exposure among ill vs non-ill
bathers was 13.8 min vs 14.4 min, respectively (P = .52).
We assessed the goodness of fit for
each of the three models (Table 4) using
the log likelihood statistic.19 These analyses yielded the following results: when the
"threshold" term Loglo (FC - 100) was
removed from the model containing both
the Loglo (FC + 1) and Log1o (FC - 100)
terms (Model 3, Table 4), there was a
nearly statistically significant decrease in
the goodness of the fit of the model
(P = .058). Removal of the "nonthreshold" term Log1o (FC + 1) from Model 3

September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9

of Table 4 did not decrease the model's
goodness of fit (P = .84). These results
suggest that the model containing the
threshold term Loglo (FC 100) (Model
2, Table 4) is the appropriate logistic
regression model for the data under
analysis.
Inspection of Model 2, Table 4,
shows a statistically significant doseresponse relationship between fecal coliform exposure and the occurrence of ear
ailments among bathers. It must be
stressed that no interaction was observed
between any of the independent variables
shown in Model 2, Table 4.
-

Eye Ailments
Ten bathers and 10 nonbathers reported having an eye ailment on one of
the four trial days and were excluded from
further analyses. When bathers were
divided into quartiles of indicator organism exposure, there was no evidence of a
trend in increased risk of eye ailments
among nonbathers vs bathers at quartiles
of increasing indicator organism exposure. This was true for each of the five
indicator organisms assayed at each of the
three water-quality sampling depths used.
Bathers exposed to the highest quartiles
of indicator organism exposure were then
compared with nonbathers and bathers
exposed to the lowest quartile of indicator
organism exposure. No statistically significant differences in reported rates of eye
ailments were observed for any of the
indicator organisms assayed at any of the
three sampling depths used. Higher rates
of eye ailments among bathers relative to
nonbathers were, however, observed at

all four study locations. When the data
from all four study locations were combined, bathers were observed to have
statistically significantly higher rates of
eye ailments than nonbathers (MantelHaenszel weighted odds ratio 2.06; 95%
CI = 1.01, 4.25).
No confounding of the observed
excess risk among bathers was found to
occur with respect to any ofthe non-waterrelated risk factors or possible confounders, nor was there any difference in the
average duration of exposure among
bathers who reported eye ailments and
those who did not (12.8 min vs 14.5 min,
respectively; P = .23). Again, no sitespecific effects on the distributation of eye
ailments were observed.
=

Skin Ailments
Seventy-nine bathers and 93 nonbathexcluded from subsequent analysis because they reported a history of
chronic skin ailments, specifically eczema
or psoriasis, or reported a skin ailment on
the trial day. Comparisons were made of
the rates of skin ailments among nonbathers vs bathers at quartiles of indicator
organism exposure. No statistically significant trends in skin ailment rates were
observed for any of the five indicator
organisms assayed at any of the three
sampling depths used. In addition, we
observed no statistically significant differences when comparing bathers exposed to
the highest quartiles of indicator organism
densities with nonbathers or bathers exposed to the lowest quartile of indicator
organism densities. This was true for all
indicator organisms assayed at each of the
ers were

American Journal of Public Health 1233



Fleisher et al.

water-quality sampling depths used. There
was also no statistically significant difference in the rates of skin ailments reported
by the combined bather vs nonbather
cohorts (10.4/100 vs 7.8/100, respectively;
P = .23).

Discussion
The results reported herein show a
clear dose-response relationship between
bather exposure to increasing levels of
fecal streptococci and increased risk of
acquiring acute febrile respiratory illness;
exposure to increased levels of fecal
coliform organisms was found to be
predictive of ear ailments among bathers.
These findings provide evidence of possible underlying pathogen-specific relationships among different indicator organisms, and thus the ability to predict
different illnesses associated with recreational swimming. Moreover, "thresholds" of indicator organism exposure
below which bathers were at no excess risk
of illness relative to nonbathers were
estimated to be 60 fecal streptococci for
acute febrile respiratory illness and 100
fecal coliform for ear ailments (Figures 1
and 2). These findings argue against the
use of a single illness or indicator organism in the establishment of marine standards for recreational water quality.
This is the first epidemiological study
to report a dose-response relationship
between increasing fecal streptococci exposure and the risk of acquiring acute
febrile respiratory illness. Unlike other
illnesses or ailments found to be associated with bathing in marine waters contaminated with domestic sewage (i.e., ear
or eye ailments), the rubric of acute
febrile respiratory illness includes lower
respiratory tract illnesses, which are potentially serious illnesses, particularly in the
very young and very old. However, we
observed no lower respiratory tract illnesses among our study participants.
Care must be used in the interpretation of the thresholds of risk we report.
Given the strengths inherent in the study
design used, relative to other published
epidemiological studies, these thresholds
are probably the most accurate estimates
derived to date. The possibility does exist,
however, that our study design lacked
sufficient power to detect increased risk of
illness among bathers exposed to indicator organism densities below the thresholds we report.
With respect to the sampling depth
most appropriate to use in conducting

1234 American Journal of Public Health

future epidemiological studies or in the
routine sampling of marine bathing waters, this report showed that when a
dose-response relationship was found
between increasing indicator organism
exposure and illness among bathers, the
relationship held only for estimates of
indicator organism density derived from
samples taken at or near the point of
actual head immersion (chest depth). It
must, however, be emphasized that the
bather cohort in our study consisted of
adults 18 years of age or older. This
finding must therefore be interpreted with
care, especially with respect to small
children who would tend to be exposed to
waters of less depth. It is thus quite
possible that indicator organism densities
derived from samples taken within the
surf or at a depth of 30 cm would be more
appropriate for assessing risk among
small children.
The reliance on volunteers to compose our study cohorts can generate
criticism with respect to the generalizability of study results beyond the study
cohort. This use of volunteers should have
little effect on the generalizability of the
results to the entire adult population at
risk. It is probable that the individuals
who volunteered for the study are people
who enjoy bathing and are thus representative of the target population, which, in
this case, is people 18 years of age or older
who bathe in coastal waters. O

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the British
Department of the Environment, Department
of Health, National Rivers Authority, and the
Welsh Office.
We thank Dr E. B. Pike and colleagues,
H. Jones, Dr A. Dawson, D. Lowthion,
Dr H. Prosser, and Dr R. Stanwell-Smith for
their assistance in conducting these studies,
and Dr R. Shore and Dr A. ZeleniuchJacquotte for their analytical guidance and
advice; we are indebted to the environmental
health officers, scientists, medical teams, district council officers, National Rivers Authority
officers, volunteers at each of our study
locations, and to local authorities of Swansea,
Wirral, Portsmouth, and Southend, where our
studies took place.

References
1. Stevenson AJ. Studies of bathing water
quality and health. Am J Public Health.

1953;43:529-538.
2. Moore B. Sewage contamination of coastal

bathing waters in England and Wales: a
bacteriological and epidemiological study.
BrJHyg. 1959;57:435-472.

3. Cabelli VJ, Dufour AP, McCabe LJ, Levin
MA. Swimming-associated gastroenteritis
and water quality. Am J Epidemiol. 1982;
115:606-616.
4. Seyfried PL, Tobin RS, Brown NE, et al.
A prospective study of swimming-related
illness: 1. swimming-associated health
risk. Am J Public Health. 1985;75:10681070.
5. Seyfried PL, Tobin RS, Brown NE, et al. A
prospective study of swimming-related illness: II. morbidity and the microbiological
quality of water. Am J Public Health.
1985;75:1071-1074.
6. Fattal B, Peleg-Oleusky E, Agursky T,
Shuval HI. The association between seawater pollution as measured by bacterial
indicators and morbidity among bathers at
Mediterranean bathing beaches of
Israel. Chemosphere. 1987;16:565-570.
7. Ferley JP, Zmirou D, Baldfux B, et al.
Epidemiological significance of microbiological pollution criteria for river recreational waters.IntJEpidemiol. 1989;18:198205.
8. Cheunk WHS, Chang KCK, Hung PPS.
Health effects of beach water pollution in
Hong Kong. Epidemiol Infect. 1990; 105:139162.
9. Balarajan R, Raleigh VS, Yuen P, et al.
Health risks associated with bathing in
seawater. BMJ. 1991;303:1444 1445.
10. Alexander LM, Heaven A, Tennant A,
Morris R. Symptomatology of children in
contact with sea water contaminated with
sewage. J Epidemiol Community Health.
1992;46:340-344.
11. Corbett JJ, Rubin GL, Curry GK, et al.
The health effects of swimming at Sydney
beaches.AmJPublic Health. 1993;83:17011706.
12. Ambient Water Quality Criteria forBactena1986. Washington, DC: Office of Water
Regulations and Standards Criteria and
Standards Division, US Environmental
Protection Agency; 1986.
13. Fleisher JM, Jones F, Kay D, et al. Water
and non-water-related risk factors for
gastroenteritis among bathers exposed to
sewage-contaminated marine waters. Int J
Epidemiol. 1993;22:698-708.
14. Kay D, Fleisher JM, Salmon RL, et al.
Predicting likelihood of gastroenteritis from
sea bathing: results from randomized exposure. Lancet. 1994;344:905-909.
15. Fleisher JM. A re-analysis of the data
supporting US federal bacteriological water quality criteria governing marine recreational waters. Water Pollut Control Fed J.

1991;63:259-265.
16. Benenson AS. Control of Communicable
Disease in Man. Washington, DC: American Public Health Association; 1990.
17. Kleinbaum DG, Kupper LL, Morgenstern
H. Epidemiologic Research. Belmont, Calif.:
Lifetime Learning Publications; 1982.
18. Maclure M, Greenland S. Tests for trend
and dose response: misinterpretations and
alternatives. Am JEpidemioL 1992;135:96104.
19. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical Methods in
Cancer Research. Vol 1: The Analysis of
Case-Control Studies. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press; 1980.

September 1996, Vol. 86, No. 9

