REVIEW
published: 17 April 2015
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00308

A short review of fecal indicator
bacteria in tropical aquatic
ecosystems: knowledge gaps
and future directions
Emma Rochelle-Newall1*, Thi Mai Huong Nguyen1,2 , Thi Phuong Quynh Le2 ,
Oloth Sengtaheuanghoung3 and Olivier Ribolzi4
1

iEES-Paris, UMR 7618 (IRD-UPMC-CNRS-INRA-Université Paris-Est, Université Paris 7), Centre IRD, Bondy, France,
Institute of Natural Products Chemistry, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam, 3 Agriculture Land
Research Center, National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute, Vientiane, Laos, 4 Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, Géosciences Environnement Toulouse, UMR 5563, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France
2

Edited by:
Télesphore Sime-Ngando,
Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, France
Reviewed by:
Hélène Montanié,
Université de la Rochelle, France
Guillaume Constantin de Magny,
Institut de Recherche pour
le Développement, France
Patricia Licznar-Fajardo,
University of Montpellier, France
*Correspondence:
Emma Rochelle-Newall,
iEES-Paris, UMR 7618
(IRD-UPMC-CNRS-INRA-Université
Paris-Est, Université Paris 7), Centre
IRD, 32 avenue Henri Varagnat,
F - 93143 Bondy Cedex, France
emma.rochelle-newall@ird.fr
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to Aquatic
Microbiology, a section of the journal
Frontiers in Microbiology
Received: 29 January 2015
Accepted: 28 March 2015
Published: 17 April 2015
Citation:
Rochelle-Newall E, Nguyen TMH, Le
TPQ, Sengtaheuanghoung O
and Ribolzi O (2015) A short review
of fecal indicator bacteria in tropical
aquatic ecosystems: knowledge gaps
and future directions.
Front. Microbiol. 6:308.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00308

Given the high numbers of deaths and the debilitating nature of diseases caused by
the use of unclean water it is imperative that we have an understanding of the factors
that control the dispersion of water borne pathogens and their respective indicators.
This is all the more important in developing countries where significant proportions
of the population often have little or no access to clean drinking water supplies.
Moreover, and notwithstanding the importance of these bacteria in terms of public
health, at present little work exists on the persistence, transfer and proliferation of
these pathogens and their respective indicator organisms, e.g., fecal indicator bacteria
(FIB) such as Escherichia coli and fecal coliforms in humid tropical systems, such as
are found in South East Asia or in the tropical regions of Africa. Both FIB and the
waterborne pathogens they are supposed to indicate are particularly susceptible to
shifts in water flow and quality and the predicted increases in rainfall and floods due
to climate change will only exacerbate the problems of contamination. This will be
furthermore compounded by the increasing urbanization and agricultural intensification
that developing regions are experiencing. Therefore, recognizing and understanding
the link between human activities, natural process and microbial functioning and
their ultimate impacts on human health are prerequisites for reducing the risks to
the exposed populations. Most of the existing work in tropical systems has been
based on the application of temperate indicator organisms, models and mechanisms
regardless of their applicability or appropriateness for tropical environments. Here,
we present a short review on the factors that control FIB dynamics in temperate
systems and discuss their applicability to tropical environments. We then highlight
some of the knowledge gaps in order to stimulate future research in this field in the
tropics.
Keywords: FIB, E. coli, biotic and abiotic factors, die-off rates, developing countries, millennium development
goals, hydrological modeling

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

1

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

Introduction

to only 12% in urban areas. Access to clean water is therefore a
problem faced by both urban and rural populations in developing
countries.
Developing countries are faced by a double problem. Often no
adequate structures exist for the long term monitoring of water
borne pathogens in the environment due to economic constraints
and secondly, very little knowledge exists on the distribution of
these microbes in tropical environments. Yet, considering the
known risks associated with the consumption of sewage contaminated water, it is critical that the factors that control the
persistence and dissemination of these microbial pathogens in
developing countries are identiﬁed. Moreover, by increasing the
knowledge base on the dynamics of the water borne pathogens
in tropical ecosystems we will be able to reduce the risks associated with the use of untreated water. However, at present,
most existing work in the tropics tends to focus on drinking
water supplies (bore holes, well, etc.) with the general environment being ignored (Opisa et al., 2012; Bain et al., 2014a) and
this despite the importance of these informal water sources for
domestic use.
Tropical ecosystems are generally characterized by higher and
more stable temperatures, higher light intensities, and lower variability in day length as well as, in the case of humid tropical
regions, high relative humidity when compared to temperate
ecosystems. All of which can be strong drivers of ecological diversity and activity. This is all the more important for microbial
(pathogen and non-pathogen) species for which environmental stability or instability can be a strong factor in determining

In many countries, poor water quality continues to pose a major
threat to human health and access to clean drinking water and
adequate sanitation continues to be a major brake on development. It is estimated that on a global scale, diarrheal diseases
are responsible for deaths of 1.8 million people annually, most
of whom are children from developing countries (WHO, 2012).
An estimated 88% of that burden is directly attributable to unsafe
water supply, sanitation and hygiene. Indeed, in most developing
countries access to clean drinking water and adequate sanitation
remains a problem despite increases in recent years. The economic situation and lack of eﬀective infrastructure means that
a large proportion of the population relies on untreated surface
and groundwater that can be highly contaminated. Moreover,
river water subject to wastewater contamination is often used for
washing of clothes and food utensils and for bathing and even
cooking (Bain et al., 2014b; Figure 1). This is true for urban and
peri-urban areas where population densities are high (Ashbolt,
2004; Kimani-Murage and Ngindu, 2007; Opisa et al., 2012; Bain
et al., 2014b) as well as in rural areas where water supplies are
often informal and therefore unregulated. Recent work has found
that rural drinking water was more contaminated than that of
urban water supplies in some parts of Africa and Asia (Bain et al.,
2014a,b; Christenson et al., 2014). These authors found that over
half the drinking water sources tested in Africa were contaminated as compared to 35% in Asia and that on average, over 40%
of rural drinking water sources are contaminated as compared

FIGURE 1 | In developing countries the lack of adequate infrastructures means that contaminated water is used for domestic activities (A). During the
rainy season when river and stream flow is high and temperatures are elevated children often play in water contaminated with latrine overflows (B).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

2

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

The criteria used to select FIB are based on the application
of the above points as determined for temperate systems. The
organisms chosen (fecal coliforms or E. coli, for example) are
then subsequently applied to tropical systems without taking
into account the potential speciﬁcities of the tropics (such as
higher temperature and humidity, diﬀerences in nutrient and
organic matter availability and higher solar irradiation levels).
All of which may aﬀect the persistence and hence, utility of the
selected bacteria as an FIB. This is further compounded by the
fact that it is not entirely clear that indicator bacteria used in
temperate countries are appropriate for tropical systems (e.g.,
Byamukama et al., 2000; Nshimyimana et al., 2014). For example,
E. coli may be able to persist for some time in tropical freshwaters (Carillo et al., 1985; Jiminez et al., 1989); Rivera et al.
(1988) showed that E. coli can be found in epiphytic bromeliads
from tropical rain forests. Furthermore, and as pointed out by
Winﬁeld and Groisman (2003) it is probable that E. coli and other
FIB can persist and even proliferate in tropical environments,
particularly those with high temperatures and elevated nutrient
and organic matter concentrations. Therefore, the environmental factors (Figure 2) that control the persistence of FIB and the
microbial pathogens they are supposed to be a proxy for may well
result in a large dichotomy between the survival of FIB and the
pathogens.
The principal methods used for detecting FIB are culture
based. In general, this method is simple and involves the inoculation of a known volume of sample into a speciﬁc culture media
and then incubation of the sample for 24–48 h at 37◦ C (or 44–
45◦ C for the thermotolerant species). The number of positive
samples or the number of colonies is then counted. This method
comes in many diﬀerent formats (e.g., test-tubes, microplates,
larger volume dip plates) which can be easily adapted to analytical capacities of the site. It is also relatively cheap, very easy to
use and requires no complex equipment and is for these reasons
the most widespread method in use. Moreover, several accredited
methods exist providing a standardized protocol that facilitates
comparison amongst laboratories. Often serial dilutions of the
sample can be used to provide an estimation of the ‘most probable
number’ (MPN) such as in the standardized microplate method
(ISO 9308-3) as is used for determining the presence and number
of E. coli. An alternative method involves ﬁltering or inoculating
samples onto speciﬁc culture media and then counting the number of colonies after a period of incubation, usually 24–48 h (e.g.,
Chahinian et al., 2012). However, these methods are all culture
based and thus rely on the culturability of the bacteria present,
a factor that can vary considerably as a function of the bacterial species investigated, the environmental parameters and the
physiological state of the bacteria (Colwell, 2000). The other main
disadvantages are that they require at least 24 h before a result can
be obtained and they are non-speciﬁc and so it is diﬃcult to identify the source of the contamination (human or animal) or even
if the bacteria is actually from fecal matter and not from another
source such as a native soil population (Byappanahalli et al., 2006,
2012b).
Some of the newer methods available can track the source of
contamination through the use of speciﬁc biomarkers such as
fecal sterols and stanols (Isobe et al., 2002; Jarde et al., 2005, 2007;

diversity (De Wit and Bouvier, 2006). Strong latitudinal gradients in diversity have been observed for natural aquatic bacterial communities (e.g., Pommier et al., 2007); Guernier et al.
(2004) also reported this for pathogenic bacteria and viruses.
However, this does not appear to be the case for soil bacteria that are more inﬂuenced by the edaphic factors rather than
temperature (Fierer and Jackson, 2006). Nevertheless, the environmental diﬀerences between temperate and tropical ecosystems may well mean that water borne microbial pathogens will
have diﬀerent behaviors in tropical, humid systems and therefore
the application of temperate models in the tropics may not be
appropriate.
The pathogens (bacteria, viruses, and protozoa) responsible
for these water borne diseases are also susceptible to shifts in
hydrology and water quality (Vidon et al., 2008b; Cho et al.,
2010a; Ratajczak et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011; Liang et al.,
2013). This is particularly important for developing countries
as the anticipated increases in rainfall and ﬂoods due to climate change will also lead to the washing out of fecal matter
from latrines on land into drinking water supplies through contamination of bore holes and of reservoirs. This will be further
exacerbated by the rapid shifts in land use that many tropical regions are experiencing. Moreover, increasing urbanization
and the need for clean water and adequate sanitation are only
going to accelerate. Therefore recognizing and understanding the
link between human activities, natural process and hydrological and biogeochemical functioning and their ultimate impacts
on human health are prerequisites for eﬃcient water resources
management.
In order to detect these waterborne pathogens at limited cost,
fecal indicator bacteria (FIB) are used as a proxy for pathogenic
bacteria. The term FIB describes the range of bacteria that inhabit
the gastrointestinal tract of homeothermic animals and includes
Escherichia coli and the fecal coliforms, Enterococcus spp., all
of which are permanently excreted in fecal material. Here, we
present a short review on FIB in tropical ecosystems. Our goal
is not to repeat what has already been published on temperate
systems (e.g., Ferguson and Signoretto, 2011; Pachepsky et al.,
2011) but to focus on the speciﬁcities of tropical ecosystems and
to highlight some of the present knowledge gaps and to suggest
some potential new directions for research in this area.

FIB: Application to the Tropics
Fecal indicator bacteria are used as a proxy for detecting the presence of pathogenic bacteria in environmental samples such as soil
and water and therefore should behave in the same way as the
pathogens there are supposed to be a proxy for. Ideally, indicator bacteria should be present in the intestinal tract of the same
animal as the pathogens; should be present only in contaminated
samples and not in uncontaminated ones; should have similar
survival patterns as pathogens outside the host; should not be
able to grow and proliferate in the environment; should be easily detectable; be of low risk to the person conducting the analyses
and, ideally, should be relatively cheap to use (Ishii and Sadowsky,
2008; Ferguson and Signoretto, 2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

3

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

FIGURE 2 | Conceptual diagram of the primary, secondary, and tertiary
sources of FIB in humid tropical environments. Humans and livestock
are the primary sources of FIB and are responsible for the direct
contamination of soils and water. The secondary reservoir is comprised of
cultivated land and inhabited rural areas that have been contaminated by the

primary sources. The tertiary source is comprised of stream bed sediments
and hyporheic zones that offer conditions that are more similar to the host
intestinal tract: low or no light due to the density of riparian vegetation, lower
oxygen conditions, reduced predation by protozoans, and higher organic
matter and nutrient concentrations.

Solecki et al., 2011), through the presence of host species speciﬁc
(e.g., human or pig) bacteria (Jeanneau et al., 2012; Neave et al.,
2014; Nshimyimana et al., 2014) or by tracking chemical contaminants that are often found in sewage such as caﬀeine or the pain
medicine acetaminophen (Jeanneau et al., 2012; Ekklesia et al.,
2015a). Knowing the source of the contamination can be particularly useful in rural, developing areas where human and livestock
often live in close proximity.
Fecal sterols and stanols, such as the molecules coprostanol
or sitostanol, are found in animal feces and are produced from
the hydrogenation of cholesterol in the intestine. The presence or absence of these molecules can therefore be used to
determine if fecal contamination is present. This method has
been used as an indication of fecal contamination in both
soils and water (Isobe et al., 2002, 2004; Jarde et al., 2005).
Moreover, when combined with measurement of other structurally related sterols to provide a ‘species speciﬁc ﬁngerprint,’
information on the source of the contamination can be obtained
(Jaﬀrezic et al., 2011; Jeanneau et al., 2011). For example, the
ratios of coprostanol:(coprostanol+24-ethylcoprostanol) and of
sitostanol:coprostanol have been proposed as being good indicators of the origin of fecal contamination as they diﬀer between
fecal matter source (Gourmelon et al., 2010).
The use of host speciﬁc genetic markers such as HF183 that
is speciﬁc to human fecal matter or Pig 2 Bac that is speciﬁc
to pig fecal matter has also been proposed as a powerful way
to identify the sources of fecal contamination (Mieszkin et al.,
2009; Harwood et al., 2014; Neave et al., 2014; Nshimyimana

et al., 2014). In this method, known as microbial source tracking (MST), molecular techniques are used to determine the
presence or absence (PCR) and relative abundance (qPCR) of
species-speciﬁc microbial biomarkers (Harwood et al., 2014).
This method can be particularly useful if the source of fecal contamination (human or animal) needs to be identiﬁed. However,
and as noted by Harwood et al. (2014) in their review on MST,
often the relative abundances of the selected genetic markers are
not strongly correlated with FIB or with the pathogens for which
they are supposed to be a proxy. This may be due to the fact
that the die-oﬀ rates of the host speciﬁc markers can diﬀer from
those of the FIB or pathogens or that the die-oﬀ rates are variable as function of the physico-chemical state of the examined
environment (Jeanneau et al., 2012). Nevertheless, future developments and reﬁnements of this method will probably lead to the
resolution of this particular problem.
Similarly, chemical indicators speciﬁc to humans can be used
to trace the source of contamination. However, although several
candidate chemicals (e.g., caﬀeine or acetaminophen) have been
proposed as a marker of human contamination for the moment
no single chemical indicator has emerged as a good proxy for
the presence of pathogens of fecal origin (Jeanneau et al., 2012;
Ekklesia et al., 2015a). It is for this reason that these latter authors
also proposed that chemical indicators should probably be best
used as a conﬁrmatory method to guard against false positives.
This is potentially of importance in tropical systems where to the
potential for naturalization and growth of FIB outside of the host
is higher. A second problem with this method is related to the

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

4

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

countries higher rainfall occurs in hotter months which can have
consequences on both survival but also the re-inoculation of FIB
to the adjacent water bodies (Pandey et al., 2012a). For example,
Isobe et al. (2004) observed higher concentrations of FIB during the dry season than in the wet season in the Mekong delta,
Vietnam. The authors proposed that this was due to lower dilution of polluted waters during the dry season when ﬂow is much
lower.

decay or removal times of these chemical indicators relative to
the die-oﬀ rates of FIB and the water borne pathogens of fecal
origin (Jeanneau et al., 2012). Indeed, these authors found that
caﬀeine persisted longer in both seawater and freshwater than the
speciﬁc biomarker HF183 or stanols. Therefore, the presence of
caﬀeine may well indicate recent contamination. However, this
work was carried out at 20◦ C and it is unknown how persistence changes at higher temperatures such as are found in the
tropics. Nevertheless, it is important to keep in mind their respective degradation rates relative to those of FIB or of water borne
pathogens when using this method.
These methods all have the advantage that they are culture
independent and have been shown to be appropriate for use in
tropical systems (Isobe et al., 2002, 2004; Nshimyimana et al.,
2014; Ekklesia et al., 2015a). However, they all require relatively
high level analytical capacities, access to which can be diﬃcult
in developing countries. Nevertheless, these newer methods provide an interesting way to track microbial contamination without
needing to rely on culture techniques.

Desiccation and Rehydration Cycles
Desiccation and rehydration also appear to play an important
role in determining the release and subsequent transfer of FIB
from soils to the water column. Soil humidity depends on a
multitude of factors including the soil intrinsic properties (e.g.,
hydrodynamic characteristics), slope gradient, surface roughness,
bioturbation, land use, and plant cover (Ribolzi et al., 2011b;
Patin et al., 2012). Solo-Gabriele et al. (2000), working in southern Florida showed that during a sequence of repeated drying and
rehydrating of a soil the numbers of E. coli drastically increased
(by over a factor of 20). Moreover, the cycles of dessicationrehydration were quite short (6 h of each process). Thus it is
clear that the rehydration of the soils, such as may occur during a
precipitation episode, can play an important role in the survival
of FIB as has been recently shown for environmental bacteria
(Kaisermann et al., 2013).

Environmental Factors
The persistence of FIB in the environment is determined by
a number of factors such as the physico-chemical status of
the system (changes in temperature, pH, humidity, salinity. . .),
the presence of other bacteria, viruses and predators and the
metabolic capacities of the bacteria (Ishii and Sadowsky, 2008;
Byappanahalli et al., 2012a; Korajkic et al., 2013b). All of which
will inﬂuence the decay (or loss) rates of FIB (Anderson et al.,
2005; Byappanahalli et al., 2012a). Moreover, the ability of the
microbes to compete eﬀectively with the rest of the bacterial community for nutrients and dissolved organic matter (DOM) will
also inﬂuence their ability to persist and proliferate outside of
their host species (Figure 2).

Organic Matter and Nutrients
Although FIB are considered to be enteric bacteria and therefore
adapted to a nutrient and organic matter rich, low oxygen environment in their host there is some evidence that they can persist
in the ecosystem and particularly so in tropical soil environments
(Byappanahalli and Fujioka, 1998; Winﬁeld and Groisman, 2003;
Anderson et al., 2005; Ishii et al., 2006; Ishii and Sadowsky, 2008).
How these bacteria are able to persist and become naturalized in
non-host environments such as soils or sediments is related to
the metabolic capacities of the bacteria and to the bioavailability
of DOM present. It is probable that indigenous bacteria (i.e., of
non-fecal origin) will be more adapted to the environment (i.e.,
outside of the host), however, this does not mean that FIB subject to sub-optimum growth requirements will disappear, it just
means that they will grow less well due to competition in ecological niches that are less well-adapted to their growth requirements.
Upon release from the host, FIB are faced with an environment
that is often colder, more dilute and has higher oxygen concentrations, although it should be noted that sediments with low
oxygen concentrations may provide a more propitious environment for FIB. Moreover, the organic matter quality and quantity
are probably vastly diﬀerent between the host and the external
environment and it is reasonable to expect that riverine organic
matter is of a much lower bioavailability than enteric organic matter. Recent work has shown that intestinal bacteria such as E. coli
are adapted to use small carbohydrate molecules that are found in
abundance in the intestines (Zoetendal et al., 2012). However, the
concentrations of these highly bioavailable molecules in water are
several orders lower (Benner, 2002). Fujioka and Byappanahalli
(2001) have shown that FIB also have the capacity to degrade a
series of carbon sources found in soils and Bouvy et al. (2008)

Temperature and Climatic Influences
Shifts in temperature can aﬀect the persistence of FIB. Boaretti
et al. (2003) showed that E. coli remained viable for up to 33 days
after incubation at low nutrient and temperature levels. Ishii
et al. (2006) found that when incubated in non-sterile soils, E.
coli grew and multiplied at temperatures of 30 and 37◦ C and
persisted for over 1 month in soils incubated at 25◦ C. More
recently, Chahinian et al. (2012) found that FIB remained culturable after 163 days at 5◦ C, a temperature considerably lower
than that of mammalian intestines. Thus it is clear that persistence in the environment can introduce a problem when these
indicator bacteria are used as their appearance may or may not
indicate that pathogenic bacteria are present. Moreover, all of this
work was conducted on temperate soils and sediments and, at
present, much less is known about the survival of these organisms
in tropical soils and water at in situ temperatures.
Data from temperate regions also shows a strong link between
survival and season (Dutka and Kwan, 1980; Isobe et al., 2004;
Oliver et al., 2006). In temperate latitudes highest rainfall occurs
during the colder months thereby tending to reduce the number
of FIB in surface waters (e.g., Mitch et al., 2010), but in tropical

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

5

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

be rigorously tested in a full range of tropical freshwater systems,
it is clear that the blind application of survival rates determined
in the cold, clear waters of temperate systems may not provide an
appropriate rate for highly turbid, warm tropical situations.

working in Senegal found that it was substrate concentration
rather than temperature that controlled FIB persistence in a
coastal system subject to high sewage inputs. It is therefore probable that given adequate concentrations of bioavailable carbon
and nutrient sources FIB will be able to survive and possibly even
proliferate in tropical environments.
The work of Garzio-Hadzick et al. (2010) also supports this
hypothesis as they have shown that the survival of E. coli was
higher in soils with a higher organic matter content. In addition,
Topp et al. (2003) found that survival was high in loamy soils and
that this survival increased with the addition of manure. These
authors proposed that the community composition of the microbial community, including indicator and pathogenic bacteria is
probably inﬂuenced by the type and amount of organic matter
in the soils. Obviously, this situation could be particularly problematic in areas where organic matter, such as fresh manure, is
recursively applied (Trevisan et al., 2002). This is often the situation in developing countries where fresh manure is frequently
used as an economical fertilizer option for both ﬁelds and in
aquaculture (e.g., Yajima and Kurokura, 2008). In one of the few
articles treating this subject in tropical soils, Byappanahalli and
Fujioka (2004) have shown that microbial community structure
and soil moisture content play an important role in controlling
the proliferation of FIB in soils, similar to the work of Oliver et al.
(2006) who worked in a temperate system. This means that in
situations with adequate soil moisture contents, such as can be
found in tropical, humid systems, the proliferation of FIB cannot be ruled out. This is further underlined by the fact that E.
coli isolated from soils is generally found to be genetically distinct
from E. coli found in host intestines (Byappanahalli et al., 2006,
2012b). This suggests that the environment selects for speciﬁc
clonal attributes thus allowing the bacteria to become naturalized
(De Wit and Bouvier, 2006).

Microbiota
Protozoan predation is a major biological FIB removal mechanism (Korajkic et al., 2013b; Wanjugi and Harwood, 2013). Viral
lysis has also been identiﬁed as an important factor and the combined eﬀect of grazing and viral lysis can be responsible for up to
70% of the loss rates over a 120h period (Korajkic et al., 2014).
However, it appears that the rates vary with FIB species and with
location. For example, Korajkic et al. (2014) found while that
grazing and viral lysis resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in enterococci numbers, this was not the case for E. coli, at least in the
site they examined (upper Mississippi River). This diﬀerential
species eﬀect poses some interesting questions on the response
of FIB to grazing and viral lysis, particularly as it is in contrast
to other work that showed a signiﬁcant impact of microbiota
on FIB abundance (Menon et al., 2003; Wanjugi and Harwood,
2013). Moreover, the diﬀerences between this results of this work
and that of previous work from sub-tropical waters by the same
authors (Korajkic et al., 2013a) points toward a potentially significant role of microbiota in other tropical systems. It should borne
in mind that grazing of FIB may not result in the immediate death
of the cell as it has been shown that FIB can pass through the
digestive tract of predators and still be viable. For example, Smith
et al. (2012) found that E. coli remained culturable even after passage through the aquatic ciliate Tetrahymena sp. in a laboratory.
How this result can be transposed to a natural, tropical environment remains to be evaluated, nevertheless, this process should
be kept in mind.

Sunlight

Associations with Particles and other
Non-Host Organisms

Sunlight inactivation of FIBs is an important process in natural
waters (Sinton et al., 2002; Chan et al., 2015). Although sunlight inactivation is important in rivers and streams, it is even
more important in estuarine and saline waters, probably as a
consequence of the higher light penetration levels due to lower
turbidity levels. Cho et al. (2010a,b) working in a South Korean
creek found that sunlight during dry weather periods was the
most important factor controlling FIB populations. In tropical
regions with high solar radiation intensities, it is probable that
sunlight is an important factor controlling the inactivation of FIB
as has been already shown for indigenous bacteria in clear waters
with high light penetration depths (e.g., Conan et al., 2008).
Troussellier et al. (2004) working with cultures of E. coli isolated
from a coastal system (Senegal River, Senegal) also showed that
survival of the bacteria dramatically decreased at high light levels. It therefore seems that light penetration in the water column
plays an important role in determining survival. We can therefore hypothesize that considering that tropical freshwater systems
are often highly turbid (Milliman and Meade, 1983; Milliman,
1995) thereby reducing light penetration, and that temperature
is high, survival rates will be much higher than in systems with
relatively high light penetration levels. Although this remains to

Many pathogens are known to produce and to proliferate in
bioﬁlms (September et al., 2007; Wingender and Flemming,
2011). Bioﬁlms are thin ﬁlms composed carbohydrates produced
by biological processes such as photosynthesis or bacterial activity
(Burmolle et al., 2012). Bioﬁlms not only provide bacteria with an
organic matter matrix of a higher concentration than in the water
column, it also can provide access to nutrients as well as providing
a type of “glue” that will allow the bacteria to remain associated
with a particle. In soils and sediments, bacteria, including FIB
and pathogens, tend to be associated with particles as opposed to
in the free-state (e.g., Oliver et al., 2007). In aquatic systems the
percentages of particle associated bacteria are highly variable and
can range from 10% in clear waters with very low organic particle
loads to over 70% in estuaries with high particle loads (Crump
et al., 1998; Lemee et al., 2002). Moreover, Suter et al. (2011) have
shown that higher proportions of FIB are associated with particles
(52.9 ± 20.9% and to over 90% in some areas) than total bacteria
(23.8 ± 15.0%) and that, perhaps unsurprisingly, that these values
were related to turbidity levels.
The attachment of FIB and non-FIB bacteria to particles is
also due to changes in ionic strength of the media (Zita and
Hermansson, 1994; Otto et al., 1999). The dilution of stream

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

6

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

due to the washing out of contaminants during ﬂood events. In
Bangladesh, Kunii et al. (2002) also demonstrated that ﬂooding drastically reduced the health of the communities aﬀected.
However, the rigorous evaluation of this relationship in other
tropical regions is hampered by the availability of epidemiological
data (Karanis et al., 2007).
The processes responsible for the dispersion of FIB depend
on the spatial scale of observation and given the importance of
water in the dissemination of FIB, it is perhaps not surprising
that hydrology plays an integral role (Figure 2). Having an accurate description of how water (e.g., rain) and the particles and
solutes carried by that water are transferred from land to water is
still a fundamental hydrological challenge (Klaus and McDonnell,
2013). Yet this is a prerequisite for understanding the spread and
fate of FIB. The relative amount of groundwater (i.e., with little
or no load of particles and FIB) controls the magnitude of the
dilution eﬀect of bacteria loads during ﬂoods. This is in contrast
to overland ﬂow which strongly contributes to soil erosion and
hence, FIB erosion processes (Ribolzi et al., 2011a). Hence, ﬂoods
dominated by overland ﬂow will be associated with higher loads
of suspended particles and probably FIB. Once delivered to the
river, sediment and FIB can then accumulate on riverbeds before
being re-suspended after an increase in river discharge (Navratil
et al., 2010).
Working in a highly urbanized watershed in South Korea
(temperate climate with four distinct seasons), Cho et al.
(2010a,b) found that FIB populations signiﬁcantly increased during precipitation, with greater concentrations occurring at higher
rainfall intensity. During dry weather, FIB populations decreased
in the presence of sunlight but quickly recovered at night due
to continuous point-source inputs. Ekklesia et al. (2015b) who
worked in tropical, urban Singapore also highlighted the importance of diurnal patterns of water ﬂow on FIB populations. The
authors found a considerable diﬀerence in FIB levels over a 24 h
period and underlined the importance of selecting an appropriate
sampling time if representative contamination levels are to found.
Sinclair et al. (2009) and Stumpf et al. (2010) also observed that
the concentrations of FIB in storm waters are higher than baseﬂow loads. Moreover, Stumpf et al. (2010) found that stormwater
runoﬀ can account for a much greater portion of overall FIB
loading in creeks as compared to non-event baseﬂow loading.
Working in tidal creek headwaters in North Carolina, USA these
authors showed that total storm loading, averaged across all
storms, was as much as 30 and 37 times greater than baseﬂow
loading for E. coli and Enterococcus spp., respectively. They found
that FIB were weakly correlated with TSS and strongly correlated with ﬂow rate and the diﬀerent stages of the hydrograph.
However, their pollutographs indicated a large intra-storm variability in FIB. They also noted that the increases in FIB loading
during stormﬂow events were due to fecal contamination from
stream beds as well as from terrestrially associated fecal contamination that is scoured from land and transported via stormwater
into receiving waters. Strauch et al. (2014) recently examined the
impact of mean annual rainfall and short term rain events on
FIB contamination in a series of upland catchments (over 600 m
above sea level) in Hawaii. They found short term rain events
had a higher impact of FIB concentrations in low annual rainfall

water or pond water by rain will alter the ionic strength thereby
inﬂuencing the attachment or detachment of bacteria to particles through inﬂuencing the electrostatic properties and the
conformation of biopolymers. Indeed, it is known that the
physico-chemical strength of the substrate surface and the speciﬁc exo-polymeric components of the bacterial surface itself
can play an important role in determining if a bacteria becomes
attached to a particle (Regina et al., 2014).
In one of the few articles treating the factors controlling FIB
concentrations in high altitude tropical countries, Byamukama
et al. (2005) show that the presence of FIB in aquatic systems
was correlated to total suspended solids (TSSs) concentrations. In
rivers and streams, turbidity, which is directly related to the concentration of particles in the water column, tends to be higher in
tropical regions due to the highly erosive nature of precipitation,
basin geomorphology, land use and soils and sediment erodibility in the watersheds (Milliman and Meade, 1983; Milliman and
Syvitski, 1992). It is therefore probable that higher proportions
of FIB will be particle attached in these ecosystems. However, at
the moment, little or no information exists on the proportions of
attached and free FIB in tropical water bodies.
E. coli can also survive in periphyton communities in streams.
Periphyton includes a wide diversity of organisms that live in
the bioﬁlms attached to surfaces in aquatic systems. This community includes diatoms and other phytoplankton, protozoa,
environmental bacteria and other microorganisms. Ksoll et al.
(2007), working in Lake Superior showed that FIB can persist and
even proliferate in the periphyton community. Moreover, these
authors also proposed that some of the E. coli strains found had
become naturalized to the periphyton community thus allowing
them to become a self-sustaining population.
Work in temperate and sub-tropical sites has also revealed
the presence of FIB associated with macrophytes and ﬁlamentous
cyanobacteria (Byappanahalli et al., 2003; Vijayavel et al., 2013).
Karim et al. (2004) working in a constructed wetland in Arizona
reported that the presence of macrophytes increased the persistence of FIB in the water column and sediments. They also found
that die-oﬀ rates were much lower in the sediments than in the
water column, pointing toward a potentially important role of
particles in maintaining FIB populations viable. To our knowledge, little published information exists on the presence of FIB in
periphyton or in association with macrophytes or cyanobacteria
in tropical, humid, systems.

Storm Events and Inter-Storm Flow Periods
Epidemiological studies show a statistical relationship between
diarrhea and climate variables (Jagai et al., 2009; Nichols et al.,
2009). Recently, in a review of the probable future impacts of
climate change on pathogens in surface waters, Hofstra (2011)
pointed out that future shifts in climate will only increase the
spread of waterborne pathogens. This will be even more problematic in developing countries where infrastructures to deal
with ﬂoods and adequate public health protection measures are
lacking. Hrdinka et al. (2012), working in the Czech Republic
compared the impacts of ﬂoods and droughts on water quality and they found that ﬂood events had a signiﬁcantly greater
impact on water quality than periods of low ﬂow. This was

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

7

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

ﬁelds to aquatic systems in temperate systems (e.g., Crowther
et al., 2003; Pachepsky et al., 2006, 2011), the processes aﬀecting the transport of FIB from agricultural sources in tropical and
sub-tropical systems are still poorly understood.
In intensive farming areas where manure production is high
there is a higher possibility of soil and aquatic contamination
(Brown et al., 2014; Pandey et al., 2014). Moreover, if these
production zones are near to streams and rivers or if the animals have direct access to the stream then contamination of the
water course by FIB will be highly probable (e.g., Crowther et al.,
2003; Gannon et al., 2005; Vidon et al., 2008a; Monaghan et al.,
2009). Kloot (2007) examined E. coli contamination in a rural
South Carolina watershed and found that headstreams with high
numbers of cattle in the adjacent ﬁelds had the highest FIB densities. In the American Midwest, Vidon et al. (2008a) found that
during periods of low ﬂow (summer and fall) cattle access to
streams could drastically impact the bacterial water quality. They
also highlighted the importance of good management practice
in reducing the contamination levels in the streams. Monaghan
et al. (2009), working in Southern New Zealand, described some
key linkages between land management activities and stream
water quality. These authors proposed that limiting stock access
to unfenced lengths of a stream and the planting and maintaining of riparian margins were important land management
practices. The role of good management practice in reducing contamination from agricultural activities was further underlined by
Gannon et al. (2005) in Southern Alberta, Canada. These authors
proposed that the use of in-stream reservoirs may signiﬁcantly
reduce contamination thereby increasing the quality of limited
rural water supplies suﬃciently that their reuse and safe discharge
into downstream water sources was possible.
In tropical areas, humid zones are often characterized by rice
farming and small scale ﬁsh pond farming that are sometimes
subject to fertilization by fresh animal manure (e.g., Yajima and
Kurokura, 2008). This practice can result in high levels of FIB
contamination in ponds and in downstream waters, potentially
impacting health of local communities. Riparian zones are also
known to play an important role in trapping sediments (Ziegler
et al., 2006; Vigiak et al., 2008; Wanyama et al., 2012) and bacteria in both tropical and temperate systems subject to agricultural
inputs (Monaghan et al., 2009; Ribolzi et al., 2011a). However,
in many areas riparian zones are increasingly used for cultivation and so it is probable that the levels of transport of FIB
from the terrestrial system to the aquatic environment will only
increase. Wetland areas are also well-known as trapping zones
and in temperate systems much work has been done on the retention and persistence of FIB in sediments in freshwater, estuarine
and coastal systems (e.g., Chu et al., 2011; Pachepsky and Shelton,
2011; Chahinian et al., 2012). However, to our knowledge, with
the notable exception of the work of Ribolzi et al. (2011a) who
worked in an upland agricultural catchment in Laos, little other
published data presently exists on the role of riparian vegetation
or wetlands in the retention of FIB in tropical systems.
Another factor that needs to be taken into account is the
application of agrochemicals such as pesticides, herbicides, and
antibiotics. Through their selective eﬀects on diﬀerent soil and
aquatic organisms they aﬀect survival of FIB and the associated

areas than in high annual rainfall areas. They also observed that
declines in forest cover and increases in urbanization lead to
increased FIB concentrations.
In tropical systems, the relationship between baseﬂow and
stormﬂow can also play an important role in the erosion and
resuspension of sediments (Gourdin et al., 2014). Tropical systems are often characterized by heavy rainfall that can be highly
erosive (Lal, 1983). Erosive rainfall events result in strong overland ﬂow events which can accelerate detachment processes and
increase the numbers of particles and of particle attached bacteria. This is exacerbated during exceptional events, such as
storms, and during river spates when the transfer of highly
contaminated water to downstream areas occurs (Ribolzi et al.,
2011a). Highly erosive rains also increase the splash eﬀect,
where by rain droplets with high kinetic energies increase erosion and thereby increase the export of particles and bacteria
to downstream systems (Planchon et al., 2000). This results in
the resuspension of particles as a function of ﬂow. Although
some work has looked at the relationship between ﬂow and
particle resuspension (Pandey et al., 2012b; McDaniel et al.,
2013; Pandey and Soupir, 2013), little or no work have been
done on this aspect in tropical systems where turbidity is elevated. The links between particles and FIB in small, upland
streams where contamination levels and particle concentrations can be high (Milliman and Syvitski, 1992) have also been
largely ignored. This is despite the importance of streambeds
as a source of E. coli as was underlined by Kim et al. (2010)
who monitored and modeled bacterial release from a streambed
with the modiﬁed SWAT (Soil and Water Assessment Tool)
model.

Impact of Land-Use
Other than human waste, agriculture is the other major source of
FIB in aquatic systems and land use is known to play an important role in the inoculation, persistence and dissemination of FIB
(Zhang et al., 2012). Agricultural practices in tropical systems
often diﬀer substantially from those of temperate ecosystems.
Temperate systems are generally characterized by an industrialized agriculture with large scale farms and intensive production
practices. This is in contrast to the situation in tropical regions
where agriculture is often based on subsistence farming and
extensive production practices. Farmlands are also often located
on steeply sloping lands in the upper parts of catchments.
The export of matter from soils to an adjacent aquatic ecosystem is controlled, in part, by the type of plant cover present,
the slope and the concentration of organic matter in the soils
(Magdoﬀ and Weil, 2004; Podwojewski et al., 2008; Soupir and
Mostaghimi, 2011; Janeau et al., 2014; Rochelle-Newall et al.,
2014). Moreover, the export of organic matter and bacteria can be
particularly high in sloping lands both of which can aﬀect downstream aquatic ecosystems (Ribolzi et al., 2011b; Pommier et al.,
2014). The impacts of agriculture on the ecosystem are therefore
not expected to be the same in temperate and tropical systems.
Despite this, although much work has examined the impact of
land cover and agricultural practice on the export of FIB from

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

8

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

The second type corresponds to the mechanistic (or physical) models that are process based and that describe, for example,
the transport of FIB using one-dimensional advection dispersion
equations (Wilkinson et al., 1995). More recent models of this
second type also take into account the resuspension of streambed
sediments and their associated FIB concentrations (e.g., Cho
et al., 2010b). Contrary to the ﬁrst group, this group of models
permits the analysis and ranking of the underlying mechanisms
responsible for the mobilization, transfer and concentration of
FIB in the system. However, as for all physical models, the model
needs to be parameterized and requires data inputs that are
not always available, particularly so in tropical or developing
countries with little or no monitoring networks.
The third group are the watershed scale, spatially distributed
and semi-distributed models such as SWAT (Arnold et al., 1993)
or the SENEQUE/Riverstrahler (Billen et al., 1994). These models take into account watershed morphology, spatial distribution
of soil properties and land use, point sources of pollution as
well as hydrology using a simpliﬁed semi-physical or conceptual approach. This approach allows the development of complex scenarios of the impacts of changes in climate and human
activities on river water quality in the watershed. These models
can also take into account resuspension of streambed bacteria (Kim et al., 2010), FIB die-oﬀ rates, in some cases, the role
of solar radiation in inﬂuencing these die-oﬀ rates (Cho et al.,
2012). This type of model provides an interesting way of looking at how point and diﬀuse sources in the watershed alter
the river transport of particles including FIB and solutes (Lee
et al., 2001; Pachepsky et al., 2006; de Brauwere et al., 2014).
The advantage of this latter type of model is that it can be
used to predict the impact of future changes in the system and
their potential impacts on public health on the catchment scale
(Kasheﬁpour et al., 2002; Cho et al., 2012). The application of
this type of model to study FIB transport and fate therefore
provides some interesting avenues of future research in tropical
systems.
Each of these models requires knowledge of the distribution,
behavior and ecology of FIB and the factors determining their
load. Moreover, for the second and third types, comprehensive
knowledge of solutes and particles over a relatively long period
of time as well as knowledge of the drainage basin morphology
and climate is essential. This may well prove diﬃcult or even
impossible in some areas where no data presently exists. Already
recognized as a problem in temperate systems (Crowther et al.,
2003), this becomes even more critical in tropical systems for
which little data exists on region speciﬁc FIB die-oﬀ, settling,
storm wash-oﬀ and resuspension rates, all key processes in controlling FIB levels. Moreover, and as pointed out by Cho et al.
(2012), an understanding of these key processes is critical for
the adequate implementation of FIB management and mitigation plans in the natural environment. Indeed, although some of
the existing models have been adapted to tropical systems (e.g.,
Le et al., 2005; Luu et al., 2010), few, to our knowledge, have
extended their work to include the transport and fate of FIB
in these systems. A notable exception to this is the work from
the coastal area of sub-tropical Hong Kong (Thoe et al., 2012).
Clearly this is an area that merits future study.

pathogens (Staley et al., 2014). The reduction of protozoan grazing and the lessening of bacterial competition through selective
inhibition were found to be the main mechanisms via which
agrochemicals indirectly increase FIB concentrations. In contrast, no direct impact was observed on FIB populations (Staley
et al., 2011, 2012). This work was conducted in small incubations in the laboratory in the US and for the moment the impact
of agrochemicals on FIB survival in situ in other environments
has yet to be examined. Given the increasing application of agrochemicals in tropical, developing areas we can ask how FIB in
these warmer, more humid systems might respond to the additions of agrochemicals. Clearly, this is an area of research that
should be investigated because if the same indirect eﬀects are
observed in the tropics the increasing use of agrochemicals may
well-exacerbate the problems of FIB contamination in aquatic
systems.
Tropical, rural areas are often characterized by the close proximity of human habitations without adequate waste treatment
systems to streams and rivers. This nearness of the primary source
of FIB (e.g., human and animal waste; Figure 2) and the stream
network constitutes an elevated risk factor in terms of contamination. Indeed, many villagers use the water source for multiple uses
such as a potable water supply, for bathing and washing and for
evacuation of waste (Figure 1). Clearly this situation is problematic for the downstream users of the water resource, particularly
as in many rural areas no water treatment systems are in place for
drinking water or for wastewater treatment. Nor are there surveillance networks in place to detect and alert the population at times
of high contamination risk.

Modeling
Under future global and land use change scenarios, it is anticipated that tropical systems will be subject to shifts in the frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall events. This, combined
with an intensiﬁcation of agriculture, will potentially induce
drastic changes in overland ﬂow, soil erosion (e.g., Thothong
et al., 2011) and, in turn, in the transport of FIB to aquatic systems (Hofstra, 2011). One way of addressing this challenge is
to use mathematical models to investigate the eﬀects of land
use and climate change on the hydrology and transport of FIB
with the objective of reducing the risks to humans (Miller et al.,
2013).
Several models have been developed to model and predict the
distribution of FIB in streams and rivers. In general, three main
types of approach are used. The ﬁrst are statistical-based models
such as multiple linear regression and artiﬁcial neural networks
(e.g., Thoe et al., 2012). This type of model uses input variables,
usually environmental parameters, to provide an output, usually
FIB concentration, via a series of multivariate linear regressions
(Mahloch, 1974; Chu et al., 2011). The main advantage of this
type of model is its facility and rapidity of implementation.
However, the principal disadvantages are that this type of model
is site speciﬁc and is based on statistical relationships, meaning
that none of the associated physical and biological processes are
explicitly taken in account.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

9

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

Conclusion

temperate systems or in tropical systems in developed countries and little or no data is available on these parameters in
developing nations where the death and disability rates due to
the use of unclean water are highest. This paucity of information on tropical ecosystems, with the exception of the pioneering work of conducted in Hawaii, Uganda and Singapore
(e.g., Byappanahalli and Fujioka, 1998; Byamukama et al., 2005;
Nshimyimana et al., 2014; Ekklesia et al., 2015a) means that much
remains unknown.
For example, we do not know anything about the survival
of FIB or indeed of the pathogens they are supposed to be a
proxy for, in tropical upland soils, nor on their transport downstream in small agricultural watersheds subject to monsoonal
weather patterns. Nor do we have an idea of how the rates of
contamination under baseﬂow and stormﬂow will change their
transport in the future. Given the importance of land use in the
export of soil and the associated microbial pathogens, it is probable that better management of the landscape mosaic and the
optimization of land use will diminish the risks of pathogen survival and dissemination. However, little information exists on
the eﬃcacy of this proposition or on its applicability to tropical
systems.
We do not know how the interactions between fertilizers, temperature and organic matter contents of soils impact FIB and
pathogen persistence in a wide range of tropical systems, nor do
we know how this persistence impacts their eventual transfer into
adjacent rivers and streams. Similarly, we have no information
on how agrochemicals aﬀect FIB survival in tropical environments. We have no information on the survival or naturalization
of the FIB in tropical streams and rivers and little is known on
whether FIB and the pathogens they are supposed to be a proxy
for, are harbored in macrophytes or in association with other
phototrophs such as cyanobacteria and periphyton in stream
bioﬁlms. We have little or no information on the die-oﬀ rates of
FIB in turbid, tropical systems, nor on the interactions between
temperature, light and on protozoan grazing and viral lysis on
their survival. These aspects need to be addressed before adequate validation data sets can be produced for the development
of appropriate mechanistic models of FIB transport and fate in
aquatic systems.
The development and application of statistical and watershed scale, spatially distributed models to tropical watersheds will
also provide new opportunities to explore the impact of climate
change on FIB and pathogen concentrations. The application of
models such as SWAT may well provide an interesting avenue
for this. Models that enable the testing of more realistic scenarios that include changes in all input variables are also needed.
Moreover, given the importance of overland ﬂow in determining
the levels of contamination, it is critical that the contributions of
groundwater and surface water are adequately taken into account.
Another aspect that needs to be considered is the impact of nutrient and organic matter concentrations and quality in determining
FIB survival. At present none of the models take these factors
into account and this is true for temperate systems where extensive datasets exist as well as in tropical environments where it is
even more critical. Given that FIB may well be able to proliferate
in tropical systems, it is clear that this must be taken into

The developing countries of the intertropical belt will be the worst
hit by global change (Gross, 2002). This region already has the
highest global soil erosion rates (Lal, 1983; Milliman and Meade,
1983) and it is anticipated that these rates will increase in the
future given the anticipated changes in global climate. The high
erosion rates found in these regions will further favor the development of sediment deposition and resuspension zones and with
them, potential reservoirs for FIB. A conceptual diagram of the
processes aﬀecting FIB in tropical systems is given in Figure 2.
The primary sources of FIB in the tropics (humans and livestock) all contribute to the dissemination of FIB at the soil surface
in cultivated lands and inhabited areas via open air defecation
and latrines, manure application and livestock. The primary
sources also directly contaminate adjacent aquatic ecosystems via
direct waste and wastewater release. In humid, tropical zones
rain events are often characterized by high intensities and depth.
During these events, contaminated soils are washed oﬀ in overland ﬂow that contains high suspended sediment loads (Gourdin
et al., 2014). This overland ﬂow in turn contaminates oﬀ-site soils
and downstream water bodies resulting in a secondary reservoir
of FIB. This secondary reservoir also includes cultivated land and
inhabited rural areas, has a hypothesized lower FIB survival rate
than that of the primary source. This lower survival is due to in
part to the higher light and temperatures in the tropics and their
interactive eﬀects. The tertiary source, comprised of stream bed
sediments and hyporheic zones, oﬀers conditions that are more
similar to the host intestinal tract: low or no light levels due to
the density of riparian vegetation, low oxygen conditions and
reduced predation by protozoans (Pachepsky and Shelton, 2011).
It should be noted that the reduction in predation by protozoa
in sediments is probably not speciﬁc to the tropics. However, it
may well be that the sedimentary dynamics in these zones tend
to accentuate the phenomena of erosion (Burmolle et al., 2012)
and deposition in the rivers and streams (e.g., Gourdin et al.,
2014) and thus multiply the number of potential reservoirs of
these tertiary sources. This is all the more probable considering
that the particles washed oﬀ from the soil surface are often rich
in organic carbon (Gourdin et al., 2015). All of these physical,
biological and ecological factors probably combine to favor the
survival of FIB outside of their host. Moreover, in tropical humid
environments, this is further compounded by higher and more
stable temperatures, higher nutrient and organic matter availabilities and higher annual rainfall. All of which interact to favor the
persistence and potentially the proliferation of FIB in this tertiary
source (Figure 2).

Future Directions
Although much is known about the sources, transport and fate
of FIB in temperate climates it is clear that a more detailed
investigation of the factors controlling the environmental persistence of FIBs in tropical environments is needed. The majority of data on the concentration, dispersal, persistence, or
proliferation of FIBs comes from studies conducted in either

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

10

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

the local populations, these factors also need to be taken into
account.

account in any model that wishes to simulate FIB dissemination
or proliferation.
The compilation of a comprehensive data base of epidemiological parameters will also provide a new avenue for testing
the role of climate in the dispersion of FIB and the impacts
of contaminated waters on public health in developing countries. More research is needed in these areas if we are to meet
the Millennium Development goals as regards clean water access
and the prevention of water borne diseases in these often poor,
rural tropical areas. Finally, we have focused on the environmental and ecological implications of FIB and have not taken into
account the socio-economic speciﬁcities of developing countries.
Clearly if any progress is to be made in reducing the risks to

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the French ANR “Teciteasy”
(ANR-13-AGRO-0007), French Institut de Recherche pour
le Développement (IRD), the UMR iEES-Paris and the
UMR GET. The MSEC (Multi-Scale Environmental Changes,
http://web2.obs-mip.fr/msec/) network is also thanked. This
work forms part of the PhD thesis requirements of NTMH who
beneﬁted from a thesis research grant from IRD (ARTS).

References

Byappanahalli, M. N., and Fujioka, R. S. (1998). Evidence that tropical soil environment can support the growth of Escherichia coli. Water Sci. Technol. 38,
171–174. doi: 10.1016/S0273-1223(98)00820-8
Byappanahalli, M. N., and Fujioka, R. S. (2004). Indigenous soil bacteria and low
moisture may limit but allow faecal bacteria to multiply and become a minor
population in tropical soils. Water Sci. Technol. 50, 27–32.
Byappanahalli, M. N., Nevers, M. B., Korajkic, A., Staley, Z. R., and Harwood, V. J.
(2012a). Enterococci in the environment. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 76, 685–706.
doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00023-12
Byappanahalli, M. N., Yan, T., Hamilton, M. J., Ishii, S., Fujioka, R. S., Whitman,
R. L., et al. (2012b). The population structure of Escherichia coli isolated
from subtropical and temperate soils. Sci. Total Environ. 417, 273–279. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.12.041
Byappanahalli, M. N., Shively, D. A., Nevers, M. B., Sadowsky, M. J., and Whitman,
R. L. (2003). Growth and survival of Escherichia coli and enterococci populations in the macro-alga Cladophora (Chlorophyta). FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 46,
203–211. doi: 10.1016/S0168-6496(03)00214-9
Byappanahalli, M. N., Whitman, R. L., Shively, D. A., Sadowsky, M. J., and Ishii,
S. (2006). Population structure, persistence, and seasonality of autochthonous
Escherichia coli in temperate, coastal forest soil from a Great Lakes watershed.
Environ. Microbiol. 8, 504–513. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2005.00916.x
Carillo, M., Estrada, E., and Hazen, T. C. (1985). Survival and enumeration of the
fecal indicators Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis and Escherichia coli in a tropical
rain forest watershed. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 50, 468–476.
Chahinian, N., Bancon-Montigny, C., Caro, A., Got, P., Perrin, J. L., Rosain, D.,
et al. (2012). The role of river sediments in contamination storage downstream of a waste water treatment plant in low ﬂow conditions: organotins,
faecal indicator bacteria and nutrients. Estuar. Coast. Shelf. Sci. 114, 70–81. doi:
10.1016/j.ecss.2011.09.007
Chan, Y. M., Thoe, W., and Lee, J. H. W. (2015). Field and laboratory studies of
Escherichia coli decay rate in subtropical coastal water. J. Hydro Environ. Res. 9,
1–14. doi: 10.1016/j.jher.2014.08.002
Cho, K. H., Cha, S. M., Kang, J.-H., Lee, S. W., Park, Y., Kim, J.-W., et al.
(2010a). Meteorological eﬀects on the levels of fecal indicator bacteria in
an urban stream: a modeling approach. Water Res. 44, 2189–2202. doi:
10.1016/j.watres.2009.12.051
Cho, K. H., Pachepsky, Y. A., Kim, J. H., Guber, A. K., Shelton, D. R., and Rowland,
R. (2010b). Release of Escherichia coli from the bottom sediment in a ﬁrst-order
creek: experiment and reach-speciﬁc modeling. J. Hydrol. 391, 322–332. doi:
10.1016/j.jhydrol.2010.07.033
Cho, K. H., Pachepsky, Y. A., Kim, J. H., Kim, J. W., and Park, M. H.
(2012). The modiﬁed SWAT model for predicting fecal coliforms in the
Wachusett Reservoir Watershed, USA. Water Res. 46, 4750–4760. doi:
10.1016/j.watres.2012.05.057
Christenson, E., Bain, R., Wright, J., Aondoakaa, S., Hossain, R., and Bartram, J.
(2014). Examining the inﬂuence of urban deﬁnition when assessing relative
safety of drinking-water in Nigeria. Sci. Total Environ. 490, 301–312. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.05.010
Chu, Y., Salles, C., Tournoud, M. G., Got, P., Troussellier, M., Rodier,
C., et al. (2011). Faecal bacterial loads during ﬂood events in

Anderson, K. L., Whitlock, J. E., and Harwood, V. J. (2005). Persistence and
diﬀerential survival of fecal indicator bacteria in subtropical waters and sediments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 3041–3048. doi: 10.1128/AEM.71.6.30413048.2005
Arnold, J. G., Allen, P. M., and Bernhardt, G. (1993). A comprehensive surface groundwater ﬂow model. J. Hydrol. 142, 47–69. doi: 10.1016/00221694(93)90004-S
Ashbolt, N. J. (2004). Microbial contamination of drinking water and
disease outcomes in developing regions. Toxicology 198, 229–238. doi:
10.1016/j.tox.2004.01.030
Bain, R., Cronk, R., Hossain, R., Bonjour, S., Onda, K., Wright, J., et al. (2014a).
Global assessment of exposure to faecal contamination through drinking
water based on a systematic review. Trop. Med. Int. Health 19, 917–927. doi:
10.1111/tmi.12334
Bain, R., Cronk, R., Wright, J., Yang, H., Slaymaker, T., and Bartram, J. (2014b).
Fecal contamination of drinking-water in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 11:e1001644. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.1001644
Benner, R. (2002). “Chemical composition and reactivity,” in Biogeochemistry of
Marine Dissolved Organic Matter, eds D. Hansell and C. A. Carlson (San Diego,
CA: Academic Press), 59–90. doi: 10.1016/B978-012323841-2/50005-1
Billen, G., Garnier, J., and Hanset, P. (1994). Modeling phytoplankton development
in whole drainage networks - the Riverstrahler model applied to the Seine River
system. Hydrobiologia 289, 119–137. doi: 10.1007/BF00007414
Boaretti, M., Del Mar Lleò, M., Bonato, B., Signoretto, C., and Canepari, P.
(2003). Involvement of rpoS in the survival of Escherichia coli in the viable
but non-culturable state. Environ. Microbiol. 5, 986–996. doi: 10.1046/j.14622920.2003.00497.x
Bouvy, M., Briand, E., Boup, M. M., Got, P., Leboulanger, C., Bettarel, Y., et al.
(2008). Eﬀects of sewage discharges on microbial components in tropical
coastal waters (Senegal, West Africa). Mar. Freshw. Res. 59, 614–626. doi:
10.1071/MF07244
Brown, S. B., Ikenberry, C. D., Soupir, M. L., Bisinger, J., and Russell, J. R. (2014).
Predicting time cattle spend in streams to quantify direct deposition of manure.
Appl. Eng. Agric. 30, 187–195.
Burmolle, M., Kjoller, A., and Sorensen, S. J. (2012). “An invisible workforce:
bioﬁlms in the soil,” in Microbial Bioﬁlm: Current Research and Applications,
eds G. Lear and G. D. Lewis (Norfolk, VA: Caister Academic Press), 61–71.
Byamukama, D., Kansiime, F., Mach, R. L., and Farnleitner, A. H. (2000).
Determination of Escherichia coli contamination with chromocult coliform agar
showed a high level of discrimination eﬃciency for diﬀering fecal pollution
levels in tropical waters of Kampala, Uganda. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66,
864–868. doi: 10.1128/AEM.66.2.864-868.2000
Byamukama, D., Mach, R. L., Kansiime, F., Manaﬁ, M., and Farnleitner, A. H.
(2005). Discrimination eﬃcacy of fecal pollution detection in diﬀerent aquatic
habitats of a high-altitude tropical country, using presumptive coliforms,
Escherichia coli, and Clostridium perfringens spores. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
71, 65–71. doi: 10.1128/AEM.71.1.65-71.2005

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

11

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

Northwestern Mediterranean coastal rivers. J. Hydrol. 405, 501–511. doi:
10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.05.047
Colwell, R. (2000). “Bacterial death revisited,” in Nonculturable Microorganisms
in the Environment, eds R. Colwell and D. J. Grimes (Washington, DC: ASM
Press), 325–342. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4757-0271-2_18
Conan, P., Joux, F., Torreton, J. P., Pujo-Pay, M., Douki, T., Rochelle-Newall, E.,
et al. (2008). Eﬀect of solar ultraviolet radiation on bacterio- and phytoplankton
activity in a large coral reef lagoon (southwest New Caledonia). Aquat. Microb.
Ecol. 52, 83–98. doi: 10.3354/ame01204
Crowther, J., Wyer, M. D., Bradford, M., Kay, D., and Francis, C. A. (2003).
Modelling faecal indicator concentrations in large rural catchments using land
use and topographic data. J. Appl. Microbiol. 94, 962–973. doi: 10.1046/j.13652672.2003.01877.x
Crump, B. C., Baross, J. A., and Simenstad, C. A. (1998). Dominance of particleattached bacteria in the Columbia River estuary, USA. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 14,
7–18. doi: 10.3354/ame014007
de Brauwere, A., Gourgue, O., De Brye, B., Servais, P., Ouattara, N. K., and
Deleersnijder, E. (2014). Integrated modelling of faecal contamination in a
densely populated river-sea continuum (Scheldt River and Estuary). Sci. Total
Environ. 468, 31–45. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.08.019
De Wit, R., and Bouvier, T. (2006). ‘Everything is everywhere, but, the environment
selects’; what did Baas Becking and Beijerinck really say? Environ. Microbiol. 8,
755–758. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01017.x
Dutka, B. J., and Kwan, K. K. (1980). Bacterial die-oﬀ and stream transport studies. Water Res. 14, 909–915. doi: 10.1016/0043-1354(80)
90273-0
Ekklesia, E., Shanahan, P., Chua, L. H. C., and Eikaas, H. S. (2015a). Associations
of chemical tracers and faecal indicator bacteria in a tropical urban catchment.
Water Res. 75, 270–281. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2015.02.037
Ekklesia, E., Shanahan, P., Chua, L. H. C., and Eikaas, H. S. (2015b). Temporal variation of faecal indicator bacteria in tropical urban storm drains. Water Res. 68,
171–181. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2014.09.049
Ferguson, D., and Signoretto, C. (2011). “Environmental persistence and naturalization of fecal indicator organisms,” in Microbial Source Tracking: Methods,
Applications, and Case Studies, eds C. Hagedorn, A. R. Blanch, and V. J.
Harwood (New York, NY: Springer), 379–397. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-93861_17
Fierer, N., and Jackson, R. B. (2006). The diversity and biogeography of soil
bacterial communities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 626–631. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0507535103
Fujioka, R., and Byappanahalli, M. (2001). “Microbial ecology controls the
establishment of fecal bacteria in tropical soil environment,” in Advances
in Water and Wastewater Treatment Technology: Molecular Technology,
Nutrient Removal, Sludge Reduction and Environmental Health, eds T.
Matsuo, K. Hanaki, S. Takizawa, and H. Satoh (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
273–283.
Gannon, V. P. J., Duke, G. D., Thomas, J. E., Vanleeuwen, J., Byrne, J.,
Johnson, D., et al. (2005). Use of in-stream reservoirs to reduce bacterial contamination of rural watersheds. Sci. Total Environ. 348, 19–31. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2004.12.076
Garzio-Hadzick, A., Shelton, D. R., Hill, R. L., Pachepsky, Y. A., Guber, A. K., and
Rowland, R. (2010). Survival of manure-borne E. coil in streambed sediment:
eﬀects of temperature and sediment properties. Water Res. 44, 2753–2762. doi:
10.1016/j.watres.2010.02.011
Gourdin, E., Evrard, O., Huon, S., Lefèvre, I., Ribolzi, O., Reyss, J.-L., et al. (2014).
Suspended sediment dynamics in a Southeast Asian mountainous catchment:
combining river monitoring and fallout radionuclide tracers. J. Hydrol. 519B,
1811–1823. doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.09.056
Gourdin, E., Huon, S., Evrard, O., Ribolzi, O., Bariac, T., Sengtaheuanghoung, O.,
et al. (2015). Sources and export of particle-borne organic matter during a monsoon ﬂood in a catchment of northern Laos. Biogeosciences 12, 1073–1089. doi:
10.5194/bg-12-1073-2015
Gourmelon, M., Caprais, M. P., Mieszkin, S., Marti, R., Wery, N., Jarde, E., et al.
(2010). Development of microbial and chemical MST tools to identify the origin of the faecal pollution in bathing and shellﬁsh harvesting waters in France.
Water Res. 44, 4812–4824. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.07.061
Gross, J. (2002). The severe impact of climate change on developing countries. Med.
Glob. Surviv. 7, 96–100.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

Guernier, V., Hochberg, M. E., and Guegan, J. F. O. (2004). Ecology drives the
worldwide distribution of human diseases. PLoS Biol. 2:e186. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020186
Harwood, V. J., Staley, C., Badgley, B. D., Borges, K., and Korajkic, A. (2014).
Microbial source tracking markers for detection of fecal contamination in
environmental waters: relationships between pathogens and human health
outcomes. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 38, 1–40. doi: 10.1111/1574-6976.12031
Hofstra, N. (2011). Quantifying the impact of climate change on enteric waterborne pathogen concentrations in surface water. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain.
3, 471–479. doi: 10.1016/j.cosust.2011.10.006
Hrdinka, T., Novický, O., Hanslík, E., and Rieder, M. (2012). Possible impacts of
ﬂoods and droughts on water quality. J. Hydro Environ. Res. 6, 145–150. doi:
10.1016/j.jher.2012.01.008
Ishii, S., Ksoll, W. B., Hicks, R. E., and Sadowsky, M. J. (2006). Presence and growth
of naturalized Escherichia coli in temperate soils from lake superior watersheds.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 612–621. doi: 10.1128/AEM.72.1.612-621.2006
Ishii, S., and Sadowsky, M. J. (2008). Escherichia coli in the environment: implications for water quality and human health. Microbes Environ. 23, 101–108. doi:
10.1264/jsme2.23.101
Isobe, K. O., Tarao, M., Chiem, N. H., Minh, L. Y., and Takada, H. (2004).
Eﬀect of environmental factors on the relationship between concentrations
of coprostanol and fecal indicator bacteria in tropical (Mekong delta) and
temperate (Tokyo) freshwaters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 814–821. doi:
10.1128/AEM.70.2.814-821.2004
Isobe, K. O., Tarao, M., Zakaria, M. P., Chiem, N. H., Minh, L. Y., and Takada,
H. (2002). Quantitative application of fecal sterols using gas chromatographymass spectrometry to investigate fecal pollution in tropical waters: Western
Malaysia and Mekong Delta, Vietnam. Environ. Sci. Technol. 36, 4497–4507.
doi: 10.1021/es020556h
Jaﬀrezic, A., Jarde, E., Pourcher, A. M., Gourmelon, M., Caprais, M. P.,
Heddadj, D., et al. (2011). Microbial and chemical markers: runoﬀ transfer in animal manure-amended soils. J. Environ. Qual. 40, 959–968. doi:
10.2134/jeq2010.0355
Jagai, J. S., Castronovo, D. A., Monchak, J., and Naumova, E. N. (2009). Seasonality
of cryptosporidiosis: a meta-analysis approach. Environ. Res. 109, 465–478. doi:
10.1016/j.envres.2009.02.008
Janeau, J. L., Gillard, L. C., Grellier, S., Jouquet, P., Le, T. P. Q., Luu, T. N. M., et al.
(2014). Soil erosion, dissolved organic carbon and nutrient losses under diﬀerent land use systems in a small catchment in northern Vietnam. Agric. Water
Manage. 146, 314–323. doi: 10.1016/j.agwat.2014.09.006
Jarde, E., Gruau, G., and Mansuy-Huault, L. (2005). The coprostanol/sterol
ratio as indicator of organic matter provenance in soils and rivers. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 69, A756–A756.
Jarde, E., Gruau, G., and Mansuy-Huault, L. (2007). Detection of manurederived organic compounds in rivers draining agricultural areas of
intensive manure spreading. Appl. Geochem. 22, 1814–1824. doi:
10.1016/j.apgeochem.2007.03.037
Jeanneau, L., Jarde, E., and Gruau, G. (2011). Inﬂuence of salinity and natural organic matter on the solid phase extraction of sterols and stanols:
application to the determination of the human sterol ﬁngerprint in aqueous matrices. J. Chromatogr. A 1218, 2513–2520. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2011.
02.066
Jeanneau, L., Solecki, O., Wery, N., Jardé, E., Gourmelon, M., Communal,
P. Y., et al. (2012). Relative decay of fecal indicator bacteria and humanassociated markers: a microcosm study simulating wastewater input into seawater and freshwater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 2375–2382. doi: 10.1021/es
203019y
Jiminez, L., Muniz, I., Toranzos, G. A., and Hazen, T. C. (1989). Survival
and activity of Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli in tropical
freshwater. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 67, 61–69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.1989.tb0
4955.x
Kaisermann, A., Roguet, A., Nunan, N., Maron, P.-A., Ostle, N., and Lata, J.-C.
(2013). Agricultural management aﬀects the response of soil bacterial community structure and respiration to water-stress. Soil Biol. Biochem. 66, 69–77. doi:
10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.07.001
Karanis, P., Kourenti, C., and Smith, H. (2007). Waterborne transmission of protozoan parasites: a worldwide review of outbreaks and lessons learnt. J. Water
Health 5, 1–38. doi: 10.2166/wh.2006.002

12

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

Karim, M. R., Manshadi, F. D., Karpiscak, M. M., and Gerba, C. P. (2004). The persistence and removal of enteric pathogens in constructed wetlands. Water Res.
38, 1831–1837. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2003.12.029
Kasheﬁpour, S. M., Lin, B., Harris, E., and Falconer, R. A. (2002). Hydroenvironmental modelling for bathing water compliance of an estuarine basin.
Water Res. 36, 1854–1868. doi: 10.1016/S0043-1354(01)00396-7
Kim, J. W., Pachepsky, Y. A., Shelton, D. R., and Coppock, C. (2010). Eﬀect
of streambed bacteria release on E. coli concentrations: monitoring and
modeling with the modiﬁed SWAT. Ecol. Modell. 221, 1592–1604. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.03.005
Kimani-Murage, E., and Ngindu, A. (2007). Quality of water the slum dwellers use:
the case of a Kenyan slum. J. Urban Health 84, 829–838. doi: 10.1007/s11524007-9199-x
Klaus, J., and McDonnell, J. (2013). Hydrograph separation using stable isotopes:
review and evaluation. J. Hydrol. 505, 47–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2013.09.006
Kloot, R. W. (2007). Locating Escherichia coli contamination in a rural
South Carolina watershed. J. Environ. Manage. 83, 402–408. doi:
10.1016/j.jenvman.2006.03.008
Korajkic, A., Mcminn, B. R., Harwood, V. J., Shanks, O. C., Fout, G. S., and Ashbolt,
N. J. (2013a). Diﬀerential decay of enterococci and Escherichia coli originating
from two fecal pollution sources. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79, 2488–2492. doi:
10.1128/AEM.03781-12
Korajkic, A., Wanjugi, P., and Harwood, V. J. (2013b). Indigenous microbiota
and habitat inﬂuence Escherichia coli survival more than sunlight in simulated aquatic environments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79, 5329–5337. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01362-13
Korajkic, A., Mcminn, B. R., Shanks, O. C., Sivaganesan, M., Fout, G. S., and
Ashbolt, N. J. (2014). Biotic interactions and sunlight aﬀect persistence of
fecal indicator bacteria and microbial source tracking genetic markers in
the upper Mississippi river. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 3952–3961. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00388-14
Ksoll, W. B., Ishii, S., Sadowsky, M. J., and Hicks, R. E. (2007). Presence and sources
of fecal coliform bacteria in epilithic periphyton communities of lake superior.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 3771–3778. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02654-06
Kunii, O., Nakamura, S., Abdur, R., and Wakai, S. (2002). The impact on health and
risk factors of the diarrhoea epidemics in the 1998 Bangladesh ﬂoods. Public
Health 116, 68–74. doi: 10.1016/S0033-3506(02)00506-1
Lal, R. (1983). “Soil erosion in the humid tropics with particular reference to agricultural land development and soil management,” in Proceeding of Symposium
on the Hydrology of Humid Tropical Regions with Particular Reference to the
Hydrological Eﬀects of Agriculture and Forestry Practice, ed. R. Keller (Hamburg:
IAHS), 221–240.
Le, T. P. Q., Billen, G., Garnier, J., Thery, S., Fezard, C., and Minh, C. V. (2005).
Nutrient (N, P) budgets for the Red River basin (Vietnam and China). Global
Biogeochem. Cycles 19, GB2022.
Lee, K. Y., Fisher, T. R., and Rochelle-Newall, E. (2001). Modeling the hydrochemistry of the Choptank river basin using GWLF and Arc/Info: 2. Model validation
and application. Biogeochemistry 56, 311–348. doi: 10.1023/A:1013169027082
Lemee, R., Rochelle-Newall, E., Van Wambeke, F., Pizay, M. D., Rinaldi, P., and
Gattuso, J. P. (2002). Seasonal variation of bacterial production, respiration and
growth eﬃciency in the open NW Mediterranean Sea. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 29,
227–237. doi: 10.3354/ame029227
Liang, Z., He, Z., Zhou, X., Powell, C. A., Yang, Y., He, L. M., et al.
(2013). Impact of mixed land-use practices on the microbial water quality in a subtropical coastal watershed. Sci. Total Environ. 449, 426–433. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.087
Luu, T. N. M., Garnier, J., Billen, G., Orange, D., Nemery, J., Le, T. P. Q., et al.
(2010). Hydrological regime and water budget of the Red River Delta (Northern
Vietnam). J. Asian Earth Sci. 37, 219–228. doi: 10.1016/j.jseaes.2009.08.004
Magdoﬀ, F., and Weil, R. R. (2004). “Soil organic matter management strategies,”
in Soil Organic Matter in Sustainable Agriculture, eds F. Magdoﬀ and R. R. Weil
(London: CRC Press), 45–66. doi: 10.1201/9780203496374
Mahloch, J. (1974). Comparative analysis of modeling techniques for coliform
organisms in streams. Appl. Microbiol. 27, 340–345.
McDaniel, R. L., Soupir, M. L., Tuttle, R. B., and Cervantes, A. E. (2013).
Release, dispersion, and resuspension of Escherichia coli from direct fecal
deposits under controlled ﬂows. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 49, 319–327. doi:
10.1111/jawr.12022

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

Menon, P., Billen, G., and Servais, P. (2003). Mortality rates of autochthonous
and fecal bacteria in natural aquatic ecosystems. Water Res. 37, 4151–4158. doi:
10.1016/S0043-1354(03)00349-X
Mieszkin, S., Furet, J., Corthier, G., and Gourmelon, M. (2009). Estimation of
pig fecal contamination in a river catchment by real-time PCR using two pigspeciﬁc Bacteroidales 16S rRNA genetic markers. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
3045–3054. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02343-08
Miller, C. T., Dawson, C. N., Farthing, M. W., Hou, T. Y., Huang, J.,
Kees, C. E., et al. (2013). Numerical simulation of water resources problems: models, methods, and trends. Adv. Water Resour. 51, 405–437. doi:
10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.05.008
Milliman, J. D. (1995). Sediment discharge to the ocean from small mountainous rivers: the New Guinea example. Geo Mar. Lett. 15, 127–133. doi:
10.1007/BF01204453
Milliman, J. D., and Meade, R. H. (1983). World-wide delivery of river sediment to
the oceans. J. Geol. 91, 1–21. doi: 10.1086/628741
Milliman, J. D., and Syvitski, J. P. M. (1992). Geomorphic tectonic control of sediment discharge into the ocean: the importance of small mountainous rivers.
J. Geol. 100, 525–544. doi: 10.1086/629606
Mitch, A. A., Gasner, K. C., and Mitch, W. A. (2010). Fecal coliform accumulation
within a river subject to seasonally-disinfected wastewater discharges. Water
Res. 44, 4776–4782. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.05.060
Monaghan, R. M., Carey, P. L., Wilcock, R. J., Drewry, J. J., Houlbrooke, D. J.,
Quinn, J. M., et al. (2009). Linkages between land management activities and
stream water quality in a border dyke-irrigated pastoral catchment. Agric.
Ecosyst. Environ. 129, 201–211. doi: 10.1016/j.agee.2008.08.017
Navratil, O., Legout, C., Gateuille, D., Esteves, M., and Liebault, F. (2010).
Assessment of intermediate ﬁne sediment storage in a braided river
reach (southern French Prealps). Hydrol. Process. 24, 1318–1332. doi:
10.1002/hyp.7594
Neave, M., Luter, H., Padovan, A., Townsend, S., Schobben, X., and Gibb, K. (2014).
Multiple approaches to microbial source tracking in tropical northern Australia.
Microbiologyopen 3, 860–874. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.209
Nichols, G., Lane, C., Asgari, N., Verlander, N. Q., and Charlett, A. (2009). Rainfall
and outbreaks of drinking water related disease and in England and Wales.
J. Water Health 7, 1–8. doi: 10.2166/wh.2009.143
Nshimyimana, J. P., Ekklesia, E., Shanahan, P., Chua, L. H. C., and Thompson, J. R.
(2014). Distribution and abundance of human-speciﬁc Bacteroides and relation
to traditional indicators in an urban tropical catchment. J. Appl. Microbiol. 116,
1369–1383. doi: 10.1111/jam.12455
Oliver, D. M., Clegg, C. D., Heathwaite, A. L., and Haygarth, P. M. (2007).
Preferential attachment of Escherichia coli to diﬀerent particle size fractions
of an agricultural grassland soil. Water Air Soil Pollut. 185, 369–375. doi:
10.1007/s11270-007-9451-8
Oliver, D. M., Haygarth, P. M., Clegg, C. D., and Heathwaite, L. (2006). Diﬀerential
E. coli die-oﬀ patterns associated with agricultural matrices. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 40, 5710–5716. doi: 10.1021/es0603249
Opisa, S., Odiere, M. R., Jura, W. G. Z. O., Diana, M. S., Karanja, D. M. S., Pauline,
N. M., et al. (2012). Faecal contamination of public water sources in informal
settlements of Kisumu City, western Kenya. Water Sci. Technol. 66, 2674–2681.
doi: 10.2166/wst.2012.503
Otto, K., Elwing, H., and Hermansson, M. (1999). Eﬀect of ionic strength on initial
interactions of Escherichia coli with surfaces, studied on-line by a novel quartz
crystal microbalance technique. J. Bacteriol. 181, 5210–5218.
Pachepsky, Y. A., Sadeghi, A. M., Bradford, S. A., Shelton, D. R., Guber, A. K.,
and Dao, T. (2006). Transport and fate of manure-borne pathogens: modeling perspective. Agric. Water Manage. 86, 81–92. doi: 10.1016/j.agwat.2006.
06.010
Pachepsky, Y. A., and Shelton, D. R. (2011). Escherichia coli and Fecal Coliforms
in freshwater and estuarine Sediments. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41,
1067–1110. doi: 10.1080/10643380903392718
Pachepsky, Y., Shelton, D. R., Mclain, J. E. T., Patel, J., and Mandrell, R. E. (2011).
“Irrigation waters as a source of pathogenic microorganisms in produce: a
review,” in Advances in Agronomy, ed. D. L. Sparks (Burlington, VT: Academic
Press), 73–141. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386473-4.00002-6
Pandey, P. K., and Soupir, M. L. (2013). Assessing the impacts of E.coli laden
streambed sediment on E.coli loads over a range of ﬂows and sediment characteristics. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 49, 1261–1269. doi: 10.1111/jawr.12079

13

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

Pandey, P. K., Soupir, M. L., Haddad, M., and Rothwell, J. J. (2012a). Assessing
the impacts of watershed indexes and precipitation on spatial in-stream E. coli
concentrations. Ecol. Indic. 23, 641–652. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2012.05.023
Pandey, P. K., Soupir, M. L., and Rehmann, C. R. (2012b). A model for predicting resuspension of Escherichia coil from streambed sediments. Water Res. 46,
115–126. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2011.10.019
Pandey, P. K., Soupir, M. L., and Ikenberry, C. (2014). “Modelling animal waste
pathogen transport from agricultural land to streams,” in Proceedings of the
International Conferences on Geological, Geographical, Aerospace and Earth
Sciences, Jakarta.
Patin, J., Mouche, E., Ribolzi, O., Chaplot, V., Sengtahevanghoung, O., Latsachak,
K. O., et al. (2012). Analysis of runoﬀ production at the plot scale during a longterm survey of a small agricultural catchment in Lao PDR. J. Hydrol. 426, 79–92.
doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2012.01.015
Planchon, O., Cadet, P., Lapetite, J. M., Silvera, N., and Esteves, M. (2000).
Relationship between raindrop erosion and runoﬀ erosion under simulated rainfall in the Sudano-Sahel: consequences for the spread of nematodes by runoﬀ. Earth Surf. Process Land. 25, 729–741. doi: 10.1002/10969837(200007)25:7<729::AID-ESP128>3.0.CO;2-C
Podwojewski, P., Orange, D., Jouquet, P., Valentin, C., Nguyen, V. T., Janeau,
J. L., et al. (2008). Land-use impacts on surface runoﬀ and soil detachment
within agricultural sloping lands in Northern Vietnam. Catena 74, 109–118. doi:
10.1016/j.catena.2008.03.013
Pommier, T., Canback, B., Riemann, L., Bostrom, K. H., Simu, K., Lundberg, P.,
et al. (2007). Global patterns of diversity and community structure in
marine bacterioplankton. Mol. Ecol. 16, 867–880. doi: 10.1111/j.1365294X.2006.03189.x
Pommier, T., Merroune, A., Bettarel, Y., Got, P., Janeau, J.-L., Jouquet, P.,
et al. (2014). Oﬀ-site impacts of agricultural composting: role of terrestrially
derived organic matter in structuring aquatic microbial communities and their
metabolic potential. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 90, 622–632. doi: 10.1111/15746941.12421
Ratajczak, M., Laroche, E., Berthe, T., Clermont, O., Pawlak, B., Denamur, E., et al.
(2010). Inﬂuence of hydrological conditions on the Escherichia coli population
structure in the water of a creek on a rural watershed. BMC Microbiol. 10:222.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-222
Regina, V. R., Lokanathan, A. R., Modrzyński, J. J., Sutherland, D. S., and Meyer,
R. L. (2014). Surface phsicochemistry and ionic strength aﬀects eDNA’s role in
bacterial adhesion to abiotic surfaces. PLoS ONE 9:e105033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105033
Ribolzi, O., Cuny, J., Sengsoulichanh, P., Mousques, C., Soulileuth, B., Pierret, A.,
et al. (2011a). Land use and water quality along a mekong tributary in Northern
Lao PDR. Environ. Manage. 47, 291–302. doi: 10.1007/s00267-010-9593-0
Ribolzi, O., Patin, J., Bresson, L. M., Latsachack, K. O., Mouche, E.,
Sengtaheuanghoung, O., et al. (2011b). Impact of slope gradient on soil surface features and inﬁltration on steep slopes in northern Laos. Geomorphology
127, 53–63. doi: 10.1016/j.geomorph.2010.12.004
Rivera, S. C., Hazen, T. C., and Toranzos, G. A. (1988). Isolation of fecal coliforms from pristine sites in a tropical rain forest. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54,
513–517.
Rochelle-Newall, E., Hulot, F. D., Janeau, J. L., and Merroune, A. (2014). CDOM
ﬂuorescence as a proxy of DOC concentration in natural waters: a comparison
of four contrasting tropical systems. Environ. Monit. Assess. 186, 589–596. doi:
10.1007/s10661-013-3401-2
September, S. M., Els, F. A., Venter, S. N., and Brözel, V. S. (2007). Prevalence of
bacterial pathogens in bioﬁlms of drinking water distribution systems. J. Water
Health 5, 219–227.
Sinclair, A., Hebb, D., Jamieson, R., Gordon, R., Benedict, K., Fuller, K., et al. (2009).
Growing season surface water loading of fecal indicator organisms within a
rural watershed. Water Res. 43, 1199–1206. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2008.12.006
Sinton, L. W., Hall, C. H., Lynch, P. A., and Davies-Colley, R. J. (2002). Sunlight
inactivation of fecal indicator bacteria and bacteriophages from waste stabilization pond eﬄuent in fresh and saline waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68,
1122–1131. doi: 10.1128/AEM.68.3.1122-1131.2002
Smith, C. D., Berk, S. G., Brandl, M. T., and Riley, L. W. (2012). Survival characteristics of diarrheagenic Escherichia coli pathotypes and Helicobacter pylori
during passage through the free-living ciliate, Tetrahymena sp. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 82, 574–583. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2012.01428.x

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

Solecki, O., Jeanneau, L., Jarde, E., Gourmelon, M., Marin, C., and Pourcher, A. M.
(2011). Persistence of microbial and chemical pig manure markers as compared
to faecal indicator bacteria survival in freshwater and seawater microcosms.
Water Res. 45, 4623–4633. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2011.06.012
Solo-Gabriele, H. M., Wolfert, M. A., Desmarais, T. R., and Palmer, C. J. (2000).
Sources of Escherichia coli in a coastal subtropical environment. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 66, 230–237. doi: 10.1128/AEM.66.1.230-237.2000
Soupir, M. L., and Mostaghimi, S. (2011). Escherichia coli and Enterococci attachment to particles in runoﬀ from highly and sparsely vegetated grassland. Water
Air Soil Pollut. 216, 167–178. doi: 10.1007/s11270-010-0524-8
Staley, Z. R., Rohr, J. R., and Harwood, V. J. (2011). Test of direct and indirect eﬀects of agrochemicals on the survival of fecal indicator bacteria. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 77, 8765–8774. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06044-11
Staley, Z. R., Rohr, J. R., Senkbeil, J. K., and Harwood, V. J. (2014). Agrochemicals
indirectly increase survival of E. coli O157:H7 and indicator bacteria by reducing ecosystem services. Ecol. Appl. 24, 1945–1953. doi: 10.1890/13-1242.1
Staley, Z. R., Senkbeil, J. K., Rohr, J. R., and Harwood, V. J. (2012). Lack of direct
eﬀects of agrochemicals on zoonotic pathogens and fecal indicator bacteria.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 8146–8150. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01815-12
Strauch, A. M., Mackenzie, R. A., Bruland, G. L., Tingley, R., and Giardina,
C. P. (2014). Climate change and land use drivers of fecal bacteria in tropical
Hawaiian rivers. J. Environ. Qual. 43, 1475–1483. doi: 10.2134/jeq2014.01.0025
Stumpf, C. H., Piehler, M. F., Thompson, S., and Noble, R. T. (2010). Loading of
fecal indicator bacteria in North Carolina tidal creek headwaters: hydrographic
patterns and terrestrial runoﬀ relationships. Water Res. 44, 4704–4715. doi:
10.1016/j.watres.2010.07.004
Suter, E., Juhl, A., and O’mullan, G. (2011). Particle association of Enterococcus and
total Bacteria in the Lower Hudson River Estuary, USA. J. Water Resour. Prot.
3, 715–725. doi: 10.4236/jwarp.2011.310082
Thoe, W., Wong, S. H. C., Choi, K. W., and Lee, J. H. W. (2012). Daily prediction
of marine beach water quality in Hong Kong. J. Hydro Environ. Res. 6, 164–180.
doi: 10.1016/j.jher.2012.05.003
Thothong, W., Huon, S., Janeau, J. L., Boonsaner, A., De Rouw, A., Planchon, O.,
et al. (2011). Impact of land use change and rainfall on sediment and carbon
accumulation in a water reservoir of North Thailand. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ.
140, 521–533. doi: 10.1016/j.agee.2011.02.006
Topp, E., Welsh, M., Tien, Y. C., Dang, A., Lazarovits, G., Conn, K., et al.
(2003). Strain-dependent variability in growth and survival of Escherichia coli
in agricultural soil. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 44, 303–308. doi: 10.1016/S01686496(03)00055-2
Trevisan, D., Vansteelant, J. Y., and Dorioz, J. M. (2002). Survival and leaching of
fecal bacteria after slurry spreading on mountain hay meadows: consequences
for the management of water contamination risk. Water Res. 36, 275–283. doi:
10.1016/S0043-1354(01)00184-1
Troussellier, M., Got, P., Bouvy, M., M’Boup, M., Arﬁ, R., Lebihan, F., et al. (2004).
Water quality and health status of the Senegal River estuary. Mar. Pollut. Bull.
48, 852–862. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2003.10.028
Vidon, P., Campbell, M. A., and Gray, M. (2008a). Unrestricted cattle access to
streams and water quality in till landscape of the Midwest. Agric. Water Manage.
95, 322–330. doi: 10.1016/j.agwat.2007.10.017
Vidon, P., Tedesco, L. P., Wilson, J., Campbell, M. A., Casey, L. R., and Gray, M.
(2008b). Direct and indirect hydrological controls on E. coli concentration
and loading in Midwestern streams. J. Environ. Qual. 37, 1761–1768. doi:
10.2134/jeq2007.0311
Vigiak, O., Ribolzi, O., Pierret, A., Sengtaheuanghoung, O., and Valentin, C. (2008).
Trapping eﬃciencies of cultivated and natural riparian vegetation of northern
Laos. J. Environ. Qual. 37, 889–897. doi: 10.2134/jeq2007.0251
Vijayavel, K., Sadowsky, M. J., Ferguson, J. A., and Kashian, D. R. (2013). The establishment of the nuisance cyanobacteria Lyngbya wollei in Lake St. Clair and its
potential to harbor fecal indicator bacteria. J. Great Lakes Res. 39, 560–568. doi:
10.1016/j.jglr.2013.09.018
Wanjugi, P., and Harwood, V. J. (2013). The inﬂuence of predation and competition on the survival of commensal and pathogenic fecal bacteria in aquatic habitats. Environ. Microbiol. 15, 517–526. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02877.x
Wanyama, J., Herremans, K., Maetens, W., Isabirye, M., Kahimba, F., Kimaro, D.,
et al. (2012). Eﬀectiveness of tropical grass species as sediment ﬁlters in
the riparian zone of Lake Victoria. Soil Use Manage. 28, 409–418. doi:
10.1111/j.1475-2743.2012.00409.x

14

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308



Rochelle-Newall et al.

FIB in the tropics

WHO. (2012). World Health Organisation Global Data Repository. Available at:
http://apps.who.int/ghodata/: World Health Organisation
Wilkinson, J., Jenkins, A., Wyer, M., and Kay, D. (1995). Modelling faecal coliform
dynamics in streams and rivers. Water Res. 29, 847–855. doi: 10.1016/00431354(94)00211-O
Winﬁeld, M. D., and Groisman, E. A. (2003). Role of nonhost environments in
the lifestyles of Salmonella and Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69,
3687–3694. doi: 10.1128/AEM.69.7.3687-3694.2003
Wingender, J., and Flemming, H.-C. (2011). Bioﬁlms in drinking water and their
role as reservoir for pathogens. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 214, 417–423. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2011.05.009
Yajima, A., and Kurokura, H. (2008). Microbial risk assessment of livestockintegrated aquaculture and ﬁsh handling in Vietnam. Fish. Sci. 74, 1062–1068.
doi: 10.1111/j.1444-2906.2008.01625.x
Zhang, W. W., Li, H., Sun, D. F., and Zhou, L. D. (2012). A statistical assessment of the impact of agricultural land use intensity on regional surface water
quality at multiple scales. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 9, 4170–4186. doi:
10.3390/ijerph9114170
Ziegler, A. D., Negishi, J., Sidle, R. C., Preechapanya, P., Sutherland, R. A.,
Giambelluca, T. W., et al. (2006). Reduction of stream sediment concentration by a riparian buﬀer: ﬁltering of road runoﬀ in disturbed headwater

basins of montane mainland southeast Asia. J. Environ. Qual. 35, 151–162. doi:
10.2134/jeq2005.0103
Zita, A., and Hermansson, M. (1994). Eﬀects of ionic strength on bacterial adhesion and stability of ﬂocs in a wastewater activated sludge system. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 60, 3041–3048.
Zoetendal, E. G., Raes, J., Van Den Bogert, B., Arumugam, M., Booijink, C. C. G. M.,
Troost, F. J., et al. (2012). The human small intestinal microbiota is driven by
rapid uptake and conversion of simple carbohydrates. ISME J. 6, 1415–1426.
doi: 10.1038/ismej.2011.212
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2015 Rochelle-Newall, Nguyen, Le, Sengtaheuanghoung and Ribolzi.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.

.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org

15

April 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 308

