S.E. Hrudey*, P. Payment**, P.M. Huck***, R.W. Gillham**** and E.J. Hrudey*
* University of Alberta, Dept of Public Health Sciences, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2G3, Canada
(E-mail: steve.hrudey@ualberta.ca)
** Université du Québec, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, 532 Boul des Prairies, Laval PQ, Canada
H7V 1B7
*** Dept of Civil Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1,
Canada
**** Dept of Earth Sciences, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1,
Canada
Abstract An estimated 2,300 people became seriously ill and seven died from exposure to microbially
contaminated drinking water in the town of Walkerton, Ontario, Canada in May 2000. The severity of this
drinking water disaster resulted in the Government of Ontario calling a public inquiry by Mr. Justice Dennis
O’Connor to address the cause of the outbreak, the role (if any) of government policies in contributing to this
outbreak and, ultimately, the implications of this experience on the safety of drinking water across the Province
of Ontario. The circumstances surrounding the Walkerton tragedy are an important reference source for
those concerned with providing safe drinking water. Although some circumstances are obviously specific to
this epidemic, others are uncomfortably reminiscent of waterborne outbreaks that have occurred elsewhere.
These recurring themes suggested the need for attention to broad issues of drinking water security and they
present the challenge for how drinking water safety can be managed to prevent such tragedies in the future.
Keywords Campylobacter jejuni; Escherichia coli 0157:H7; health risk; multiple barriers; outbreaks;
Walkerton Inquiry

Water Science and Technology Vol 47 No 3 pp 7–14 © IWA Publishing 2003

A fatal waterborne disease epidemic in Walkerton,
Ontario: comparison with other waterborne outbreaks in
the developed world

Introduction

The public health implications of serious drinking water contamination that occurred in
May 2000 in Walkerton, Canada (a community of 4,800 residents located about 175 km
northwest of Toronto) hold important lessons for the water industry. More than 2,300 individuals experienced gastroenteritis, 65 were hospitalised, 27 developed haemolytic
uraemic syndrome (HUS; a serious and potentially fatal kidney ailment) and seven died.
The pathogens identified as being primarily responsible were Escherichia coli 0157:H7
and Campylobacter jejuni although other pathogens were likely to have been present. The
Ontario government established a public inquiry to determine the causes and responsibility
for this tragedy (Part 1) and to examine broader questions relating to the safety of drinking
water in Ontario (Part 2).
We were retained by the Walkerton Inquiry to assist in establishing the physical cause of
the contamination for Part 1 (Huck, Payment and Gillham were expert witness panel members) and to advise the Commissioner on technical matters for Parts 1 and 2 (S.E. Hrudey
was a member of the Research Advisory Panel). The determination of cause, based on all of
the evidence before the Inquiry, was the purview of the Commissioner, Justice Dennis
O’Connor. Part 1 of the Inquiry was held in Walkerton over a period of nine months during
which evidence was heard from 114 witnesses, including residents, local officials, senior
civil servants, two former ministers of environment and the Premier of Ontario.

7



S.E. Hrudey et al.

The Part 1 report (O’Connor, 2002) was made public on January 18, 2002. This landmark document provided a detailed and sobering account of the many factors that contributed to this tragedy and its serious consequences. Suffering was not limited to those
who were ill but included all those who struggled to cope with the severe illness of their
loved ones. This report should become required reading for all parties involved in the delivery of drinking water to reinforce the magnitude of personal responsibilities and range of
challenges that are inherent in undertaking to provide safe drinking water to the public.
Waterborne disease outbreaks continue to occur in North America and Western Europe
despite wealthy economies and access to proven drinking water treatment technologies.
The obvious question is: Why do serious failures continue to occur? Our analysis considered selected waterborne disease outbreaks reported in the accessible literature in relation
to the failures documented by the Walkerton Inquiry. In seeking to prevent this type of
tragedy from recurring, a minimum requirement ought to be to ensure that the main factors
contributing to the Walkerton disaster, and those that can be readily recognised from elsewhere, are fully understood and considered as a basis for recommending improvements.
Materials and methods

We attempted an analysis of the major factors contributing to drinking water disease outbreaks by searching the published English language literature over the past 30 years. We
screened papers for those that discussed specific disease outbreaks and which described
some of the failure modes contributing to the outbreak. We did not attempt to review all
outbreaks and this paper is a very selective description of the relevant literature. There was
substantial variation in the quality and detail of description for failure mechanisms among
the papers that we retrieved. The multiple barrier approach was adopted as our reference
framework for analysing the outbreak literature.
Results and discussion
Other outbreaks evaluated

Table 1 summarises a selection of 15 outbreaks from four countries each affecting between
47 and a potential of >400,000 people including a total of at least 11 deaths attributed to
waterborne disease. The factors reported to have contributed to these selected outbreaks are
considered in relation to the documented failures contributing to the Walkerton outbreak.
Multiple barrier failures

The Commissioner of the Walkerton Inquiry (O’Connor, 2002) adopted the expert
evidence that a multiple barrier approach was necessary for providing safe drinking water,
consisting of effective and robust measures (Huck et al., 2001) dealing with the following
main elements: (1) source, (2) treatment, (3) distribution, (4) monitoring and (5) response.
The Walkerton tragedy involved evident or potential failures in barriers for all of these
elements. Review of other outbreaks revealed that they commonly involved failures in
more than one barrier, a finding that reinforced the need for the multiplicity of barriers and
the assured effectiveness of each.

8

Source. Contamination commonly affects the raw water supply and constant vigilance is
required to minimise sources of contamination. Recognition of patterns that are associated
with contamination potential is essential. The pathogens (E. coli 0157:H7 and C. jejuni)
causing the Walkerton outbreak were attributed to contamination of the shallow (5–8 m)
well #5 arising from cattle manure from a nearby farm following a period of heavy spring
rainfall. Recently, a review (Curriero et al., 2001) of 548 outbreaks in the US over almost
50 years found that 51% were preceded by precipitation events at the 90th percentile of



Table 1 Summary of selected waterborne disease outbreaks
Characteristics

Reference

Richmond Height, FL, USA
January–March 1974

1,200 cases of gastroenteritis, likely
shigellosis served by chlorinated shallow
(6–15 m) groundwater

Weissman et al., 1976

Bradford, PA, USA
September–December 1979

3,500 cases of gastroenteritis of unidentified
aetiology in a chlorinated groundwater supply

Akin & Jakubowski, 1986

Bramham, England
July 1980

3,000 cases of gastroenteritis of unidentified
aetiology in a direct filtered and chlorinated
supply

Short, 1988

Eagle-Vail, CO, USA
March 1981

80 cases of gastroenteritis likely rotavirus in a
direct filtered and chlorinated supply

Hopkins et al., 1986

Orangeville, ON, Canada
April 1985

241 cases of campylobacteriosis in an
unchlorinated groundwater supply

Millson et al., 1991

Pittsfield MA, USA
November 1985–January
1986

3,800 cases of giardiasis in a chlorinated
but unfiltered water supply

Kent et al., 1988

Disraeli, PQ, Canada
August 1986

50 cases of gastroenteritis associated with
three cases of campylobacteriosis in an
unchlorinated, unfiltered surface supply

Tessier et al., 1987

Penticton, BC, Canada
June 1986

3,000 cases of giardiasis in a chlorinated,
unfiltered, surface/groundwater supply

Moorehead et al., 1990

Oakcreek Canyon, AZ, USA
April 1989

11/240 guests surveyed had gastroenteritis
likely caused by a Norwalk-like virus in an
unchlorinated private well

Lawson et al., 1991

Cabool, MO, USA
December 1989–January
1990

243 cases of gastroenteritis including 86
cases of bloody diarrhoea, 2 cases of HUS
and 4 deaths caused by E. coli 0157:H7 in
an unchlorinated community water supply

Swerdlow et al., 1992

Uggelose, Denmark
November 1992–February
1993

1,400 cases of gastroenteritis of suspected
viral aetiology in filtered, unchlorinated
municipal supply

Laursen et al., 1994

Warrington, England
November 1992–February
1993

47 confirmed cases of cryptosporidiosis in a
water supply zone serving 38,000 consumers
by groundwater with chlorination only

Bridgman et al., 1995

Milwaukee, WI, USA
March–April 1993

Possibly 400,000 cases of cryptosporidiosis
in a filtered, chlorinated surface supply

MacKenzie et al., 1996

Gideon, MO, USA
December 1993

600 cases of salmonellosis, 15 hospitalisations and 7 deaths in an undisinfected
groundwater supply

Clark et al., 1996

North Battleford, SK, Canada 1,900 cases of cryptosporidiosis in a
April 2001
chlorinated, filtered surface supply

S.E. Hrudey et al.

Location and dates

Stirling et al., 2001

intensity and 68% were preceded by precipitation events at the 80th percentile. In six of the
outbreaks in Table 1 (Orangeville, Warrington, Bradford, Uggelose, Disraeli and
Penticton) either heavy rainfall or runoff from heavy snow-melt was directly implicated.
Clearly, severe weather should demand heightened awareness and active inquiry by water
personnel into the potential for contamination.
Well #5 at Walkerton was located close to two farms posing a water contamination risk,
one of which was judged to be the source of the 2000 outbreak, notwithstanding having followed model environmental management farming practices. Concerns about contamination from farming were raised at the commissioning of the well in 1978 but no explicit
source protection measures were ever adopted. Poor location was a factor at Disraeli where

9



S.E. Hrudey et al.

the buried intake was subject to contamination from a park that (a) had hosted a large public
event attended by 3,000 people without adequate sanitation facilities, (b) was adjacent to
three open abandoned wells and (c) was subject to influence from a nearby river downstream from pig farms. Orangeville was supplied by six unchlorinated wells, one of which
was found to be under the influence of surface drainage (faecal coliforms at >600/L) from
mixed farming operations. Penticton had a surface water intake for an unfiltered, chlorinated supply in a location accessible to and frequented by Giardia-infected beavers as well as
domestic animals. Uggelose had its wellhead exposed to backup and flooding by a drain
connected to a sanitary sewer.
Poor geological conditions existed at Walkerton well #5 which was shown to be subject
to surface contamination during pump testing (faecal coliforms appearing after 24 h) in
1978. The shallow production zone consisted of highly weathered bedrock with closely
spaced horizontal and vertical fractures. Point source breaching of soil overburden followed by rapid horizontal transport in the fractured bedrock was the most plausible contamination route. Richmond Heights and Oakcreek Canyon were both outbreaks where
sewage effluent infiltration was found to have rapid travel times (9 h and 3–11 respectively)
to well intakes during subsequent dye tests. Bramham had geology that allowed a sanitary
sewer overflow to reach the well intake in 8 h.
Treatment. The Walkerton operators were asked to provide a chlorine residual (majority to
be free chlorine) of 0.5 mg/L after 15 min. However, monitoring for chlorine residual was
only expected once a day, in accordance with 1978 policy for groundwater that showed
bacterial contamination. These conditions were never adopted as express conditions of the
Certificate of Approval, the formal regulatory approval for this well. Evidence at the
Inquiry revealed that chlorine dosage practice at Well #5 was insufficient to achieve a 0.5
mg/L residual even in the absence of any chlorine demand. Although the evidence did not
allow for an estimate of the chlorine demand at the time Well #5 was contaminated, it was
reasonable to assume that the contamination causing this outbreak was accompanied by a
chlorine demand sufficient to consume entirely, or almost entirely, the low chlorine dose
thereby allowing inadequately disinfected water into the distribution system. [For reference, maintaining a 0.5 mg/L free chlorine residual after 15 min would have satisfied the
CT requirement for 99% kill of E. coli O157 at 5°C, pH 7.0 (Rice et al., 1999) by 20-fold
and the CT for 99.99% kill by 7.5-fold.] Inadequate chlorine disinfection was evident in the
Bradford, Pittsfield, Eagle-Vail, Richmond Heights and Bramham outbreaks and no disinfection was required for contamination-susceptible systems at Orangeville, Disraeli,
Oakcreek Canyon, Gideon and Uggelose.
The protozoan pathogen Cryptosporidium is resistant to chlorine disinfection and
Giardia demands optimal chlorine disinfection. Despite the recently demonstrated efficacy
of UV inactivation, robust management of outbreak risks from these pathogens requires an
effective filtration treatment barrier, either chemically assisted granular media filtration or
membrane filtration. Accordingly, several outbreaks have occurred because of inadequate
filtration performance including Milwaukee and North Battleford.

10

Distribution. Possible scenarios whereby the distribution system at Walkerton could
have been contaminated were investigated and carefully evaluated by the Inquiry. These
included (i) installation of new water mains at three locations, (ii) a fire event with potential
for associated depressurisation, (iii) mains breaks and repairs at four locations in March
2000, (iv) potential for contamination of two treated water storage standpipes, (v) cross
connections found at eight private wells and many private cisterns, (vi) potential for cross
contamination of water mains by sanitary sewers and (vii) surface flooding in the town



Monitoring. The quality monitoring requirements for the Walkerton water system were
daily measurements of chlorine residual and a specified number of monthly raw and distribution system samples for microbiological testing. For the latter, the number of samples
collected (1 raw, 1 treated and 2 distribution samples for each well in operation per month
for a typical total of eight samples) was routinely below the required number of 13/month.
Samples were routinely mislabeled as to where they were actually taken. Notably, samples
from the distribution system were often not taken. Rather, samples were generally taken
near the treated well water location so it was not possible to judge the microbiological
quality of distribution system samples. Despite this deception, the microbiological
monitoring program disclosed adverse results including presence of E. coli in treated water
on several occasions. This recurring presence of E. coli in treated water provided direct
evidence of dysfunctional chlorination because of the documented susceptibility of E. coli
to chlorine disinfection. Even more troubling was the disclosure that chlorine residuals
were not measured daily as required and that daily chlorine residual monitoring logs were
routinely falsified with repeated fictitious entries of exactly 0.5 or 0.75 mg/L. Chlorine
residuals measured by Ministry of Environment inspectors were always lower than 0.5
mg/L yet the discrepancies with the falsified records were neither formally challenged
nor rectified.
The Inquiry noted that Ontario Drinking Water Objectives were modified in 1994 to
recognise that unfiltered water, supplied from groundwater that was under the direct influence of surface water, required continuous chlorine residual monitoring and effectively
continuous turbidity monitoring. Unfortunately, there were no criteria specified to identify
such systems and no program was implemented to review Certificates of Approval to water
systems that had been granted before the new policy. As a result, well #5, which had shown
evidence of being under the direct influence of surface water at commissioning in 1978,
was not required to implement the new policy. Significantly, after considering all of the

S.E. Hrudey et al.

during the heavy rainfall of May 12, 2000. Although one or more of these elements offered
the potential for causing contamination of the Walkerton distribution system, none provided an adequate explanation for the contamination that caused the outbreak. Rather, Justice
O’Connor concluded that the primary, if not the only, source of contamination of the
Walkerton water system was cattle manure from a farm near well #5. Residents of
Walkerton were probably first exposed to this contamination shortly after the May 12
heavy rainfall.
Previously, the most serious outbreak from E. coli 0157 contamination of drinking water
occurred in Cabool causing four deaths in 1989. This was determined to have been most
likely caused by distribution system contamination with sanitary sewage during repairs of
two broken water mains and/or replacement of 43 water meters in this town that was served
by an unchlorinated groundwater supply. The sanitary sewer system was found to be prone
to infiltration of storm runoff with subsequent flooding of water distribution lines and water
meter box sites. The Warrington outbreak was apparently caused by a corroded distribution
line that allowed ingress of contaminated water from an adjacent chamber with an unsuspected cross connection to a septic tank. The Uggelose outbreak was caused by a sanitary
sewer backup that contaminated the water supply wellhead by flowing back up a drain connecting the wellhead to the sewer. Apparently, the Gideon outbreak was caused by bird faeces contaminating a treated water storage tank. The Pittsfield outbreak was thought to have
been caused by bringing an auxiliary reservoir back on-line for the first time in three years.
This change caused increased turbidity levels in the distribution system because of flow
reversals during the switchover. The auxiliary reservoir itself was found to be vulnerable to
contamination by beavers and muskrats.

11



S.E. Hrudey et al.
12

evidence presented, Justice O’Connor found that if the Walkerton system had been
required to satisfy the 1994 policy the fatal outbreak would have been prevented.
Both the Bramham and the Bradford outbreaks documented failures in monitoring chlorine residual that contributed to the outbreaks. At Bramham, the pump for adding chlorine
was discovered to be actually bypassing chlorine to the drain. This failure had been missed
because personnel did not have the equipment to check chlorine residual levels following
adjustment of the chlorine dosage. The Bradford chlorination monitoring program
involved improper procedures for determining the applied dosage necessary to produce a
residual in the distribution system.
Response. The operators at Walkerton were qualified by experience to operate the mechanical aspects of the water system. However, the evidence indicated that they clearly lacked
any substantive understanding of the need for disinfection to inactivate pathogens in drinking water and the serious health consequences that could arise from failing to maintain adequate disinfection of the Walkerton water supply. The General Manager of the system and
his brother were both granted class 2 operator status as part of a voluntary “grandparenting”
program in 1988 with neither having ever taken any training courses nor being required to
pass any examinations. They were both upgraded to class 3 operators in 1996, again without any assessment of their knowledge or skills. Neither operator understood even the most
basic elements of assuring effective chlorine disinfection. The General Manager testified
that one of the reasons that they added less than the required amount of chlorine was
because they had received complaints from town residents about the taste of too much
chlorine in the water.
The contamination most likely entered well #5 on May 12 when 70 mm of rain fell. On
May 13, 14 and 15 no chlorine residuals were measured and the opportunity to detect the
contamination of well #5 by the absence of a chlorine residual was foregone. On May 15,
well #5 was shut down and well #7 was brought on-line without a chlorinator. Although the
latter failing clearly played a role in the evasive behaviour of the General Manager over
subsequent days, substantial contamination from well #7 was judged to be unlikely.
Microbial monitoring samples were taken on May 15 at sites that were undoubtedly mislabeled but included samples that were most likely taken near to well #5. These Walkerton
distribution samples were reported to the General Manager on May 17. They included
membrane filter analyses that showed gross contamination with total coliforms and E. coli.
Gastrointestinal illness began to appear in the health care system on May 18 and public
health authorities were alerted on May 19. The local health unit contacted the General
Manager to ask whether there was any problem with the water supply. He replied that he
thought the water was “okay”. Thereafter he began flushing the distribution system and
super-chlorinating so that when contacted again by the health unit on May 20 he reassured
them that there was a chlorine residual in the distribution system. By midday on May 21, the
Owen Sound hospital laboratory had confirmed an identification of E. coli 0157:H7 from
one patient and announced a presumptive result for another. The local health unit then
issued a boil water advisory despite the assurances from the General Manager on the
previous two days.
The problem of residents complaining of chlorine taste being mentioned by operators as
a reason for keeping chlorine residuals unacceptably low was also cited in the Bramham
outbreak. Likewise, a review (Lahti and Hiisvirta, 1995) of waterborne outbreaks in
Finland also referred to one unspecified community outbreak in which concerns about formation of chlorinated organic compounds were cited as the reason for lowering chlorination to ineffective levels leading to an outbreak affecting a few hundred people. In the
Gideon outbreak leading to seven deaths from salmonellosis, it was later found that many



Conclusions

A multiplicity of failures occurred in Walkerton, despite the readily accessible experience
from elsewhere warning of similar failure modes. The challenge for improving drinking
water system safety is to reform the pervasive culture of complacency that was evident
among so many key players in the water system. Such complacency must be replaced with a
culture of personal responsibility and vigilance. This poses a challenge, in part, because we
have been successful in making waterborne disease outbreaks very rare in developed countries. Furthermore, because a single barrier failure may not cause a total system failure leading to an outbreak, there may be inadequate remedial attention given to individual failures
because each alone appears to have limited or no consequences. Internal consequences to
institute remedial action need to be created by system management. For the multiple barrier
framework to succeed in preventing outbreaks, rather than allowing continual feedback
indicating that an individual failure will likely not cause catastrophe by itself, all elements
must be maintained effective by requiring their individual performance to meet effectiveness criteria.

S.E. Hrudey et al.

residents continued to drink unboiled water after the boil water order was issued because
they did not understand the severity of the situation. Consumers only responded when
information sheets that clearly explained the need and rationale for the boil water order
were delivered to their homes. Finally, at the extreme of response failure, from the EagleVail outbreak, chlorination failed for 24 h when a chlorine cylinder emptied, triggering an
off-site alarm, but it was turned off with no investigation. Subsequently, a continuous chlorine residual monitor with an alarmed, automatic water system shutoff requiring a manual
restart was installed.

Acknowledgements

The authors are indebted to Justice Dennis O’Connor for documenting so thoroughly
what happened in Walkerton, Dr. Harry Swain for guiding the Research Advisory Panel
and Mr. Paul Cavalluzzo, Inquiry Chief Counsel for reviewing earlier publications by the
authors.
References
Akin, E.W. and Jakubowski, W. (1986). Drinking water transmission of giardiasis in the United States. Wat.
Sci. Tech., 18(10), 219–226.
Bridgman, S.A. et al. (1995). Outbreak of cryptosporidiosis associated with a disinfected groundwater
supply. Epidemiol. Infect., 115, 555–566.
Clark, R.M. et al. (1996). Tracking a Salmonella serovar typhimurium outbreak in Gideon, Missouri: role of
contaminant propagation model. Aqua, 45(4), 171–196.
Curriero, F.C., Patz, J.A., Rose, J.B. and Lele, S. (2001). The association between extreme precipitation and
waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948–1994. Am. J. Publ. Hlth., 91(8), 1194–1199.
Hopkins, R.S., Karlin, R.J., Gaspard, G.B. and Smades, R. (1986). Gastroenteritis: case study of a Colorado
outbreak. J. Am. Wat. Wks. Assoc., 78(1), 40–44.
Huck, P.M., Payment, P., Hrudey, S.E. and Anderson, W.B. (2001). A severe waterborne disease outbreak in
Walkerton, Ontario: issues relating to treatment and distribution. Wat. Qual. Technol. Conf., Nashville,
Am. Water Works Assoc. Paper M8-2 (on CD-ROM).
Kent, G. P. et al. (1988). Epidemic giardiasis caused by a contaminated public water supply. Am. J. Pub.
Hlth., 78(2), 139–143.
Lahti, K. and Hiisvirta, L. (1995). Causes of waterborne outbreaks in community water systems in Finland:
1980–1992. Wat. Sci. Tech., 31(5–6), 33–36.
Laursen, E.O., Mygind, O., Rasmussen, B. and Ronne, T. (1994). Gastroenteritis: a waterborne outbreak
affecting 1,600 people in a small Danish town. J. Epidemiol Comm. Hlth., 48, 453–458.
Lawson, H.W. et al. (1991). Waterborne outbreak of Norwalk virus gastroenteritis at a southwest US resort:
role of geological formations in the contamination of well water. The Lancet, 337 (May 18), 1200–1204.

13



S.E. Hrudey et al.
14

MacKenzie, W. et al. (1994). A massive outbreak in Milwaukee of Cryptosporidium infection transmitted
through the public water supply. N. Engl. J. Med., 331(3), 161–167.
Millson, M. et al. (1991). An outbreak of Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis linked to meltwater
contamination of a municipal well. Can. J. Publ. Hlth., 82, 27–31.
Moorehead, W.P. et al. (1990). Giardiasis outbreak from a chlorinated community water supply. Can. J.
Publ. Hlth., 81, 358–362.
O’Connor, D.R. (2002). Report of the Walkerton Inquiry: Part 1 – The Events of May 2000 and Related
Issues. The Walkerton Inquiry, Toronto, 504 pp.
Rice, E.W., Clark, R.M. and Jones, C. (1999). Chlorine inactivation of Esherichia coli O157. Emerg. Inf.
Dis., 5(3), 461–463.
Short, C.S. (1988). The Bramham incident 1980 – an outbreak of waterborne infection. J. Inst. Wat. Environ.
Manag., 2, 383–390.
Stirling, R. et al. (2001). Waterborne cyptosporidiosis outbreak, North Battleford, Saskatchewan, Spring
2001. Can. Comm. Dis. Rep., 27(22).
Swerdlow, D.L. et al. (1992). A waterborne outbreak in Missouri of Escherichia coli 0157:H7 associated
with bloody diarrhea and death. Ann. Intern. Med., 117(10), 812–819.
Tessier, B. et al. (1987). Epidemic of campylobacteriosis linked to drinking water – Quebec. Can. Dis. Wkly.
Rep., 13–14, 63–65.
Weissman, J.B. et al. (1976). An epidemic of gastroenteritis traced to a contaminated public water supply.
Am. J. Epidemiol., 103, 391–398.

