EDITORIAL COMMENTARY

Changing Challenges of Bacterial Enteric Infection in the
United States
Timothy F. Jones
Tennessee Department of Health, Nashville

(See the article by Denno et al., on pages 467–76.)

The vast majority of bacterial enteric infections in the United States are sporadic,
yet much of what is known about the epidemiology of these infections is driven
by investigations of outbreaks. Studying
sporadic infection is challenging, but critically important. The article by Denno et
al. [1] in this issue of the Journal highlights the need for ongoing studies to understand the rapidly evolving epidemiology of sporadic bacterial enteric infection.
Their work identifies a number of newly
recognized risk factors for infection in
children, who suffer from the highest
rates of disease, and provides important
data to help develop focused interventions.
We live in a society in which 46% of the
US food dollar is spent on food prepared
outside the home [2], fresh produce travels an average of 1500 miles to reach our
plates [3], a typical dinner includes ingredients from around the world, and
convenience-packaged foods are increasingly popular. The nature of enteric disReceived 2 November 2008; accepted 5 November 2008;
electronically published 26 January 2009.
Potential conflicts of interest: none reported.
Financial support: none reported.
Reprints or correspondence: Timothy Jones, MD, Communicable and Environmental Disease Services, TN Department
of Health, 1st Floor, Cordell Hull Bldg., 425 5th Ave. N.,
Nashville, TN 37243 (tim.f.jones@state.tn.us).
The Journal of Infectious Diseases 2009; 199:465– 6
© 2009 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All
rights reserved.
0022-1899/2009/19904-0001$15.00
DOI: 10.1086/596556

ease outbreaks, a large proportion of
which are foodborne, continues to evolve
along with our food supply system. The
sources of sporadic infection are likely to
be changing in a similar fashion. At the
same time, however, there is increasing
evidence that a variety of non-food exposures are important risk factors for infection in children. Controlling such risk
factors in this population is particularly
challenging and important.
While Campylobacter is the most common cause of bacterial enteric infection in
the United States [4], outbreaks of infection are relatively rare and identifying the
causes of sporadic infection is particularly
problematic. Rates of campylobacteriosis
vary dramatically, not only by state but
also among adjacent jurisdictions within
states, for unknown reasons. In the
Denno et al. [1] study, a large number of
risk factors for Campylobacter infection
were identified. They included domestic
travel, consumption of various foods, eating out, home food-handling practices,
and various contacts with animals, water,
and ill humans. With such a diverse array
of risk factors, identifying interventions
that will have a substantial effect on overall rates of this disease will be especially
challenging.
Restaurant-associated outbreaks often
attract substantial public attention. However, this work adds to the growing body
of data suggesting that sporadic infection
due to a variety of pathogens is also asso-

ciated with eating at commercial food
venues [5]. It is also one of the first studies
to identify this as a risk specifically in children. If the proportion of the American
diet prepared outside the home continues
its steady growth, better understanding of
this association will become increasingly
important.
Several of the findings in this study are
of particular interest in light of a number
of recent high-profile, produce-associated
outbreaks in the United States. Raw vegetable consumption appeared to be protective against Salmonella infection in
this population, which is reassuring in
the context of trying to encourage children to eat a diet high in fruits and vegetables for its many other health benefits.
Of potentially great interest is the additional protection afforded by organic produce. Lower risk of infection is not a welldocumented benefit of these products,
and the finding is provocative as they become increasingly popular. All this said,
the produce story is not a straightforward
one. This study shows for the first time
that salad from sealed retail packages,
which has been a cause of large outbreaks,
is also a risk factor for sporadic disease.
Prevention of produce contamination is a
difficult challenge and is currently the focus of intense discussion at the political,
industry, and public health levels. It will
be important to understand the particular
risks associated with convenience packaging as consumer demands continue to

EDITORIAL COMMENTARY

●

JID 2009:199 (15 February)

●

465



evolve. This presents yet another argument for exploring food irradiation as a
potential tool for ensuring a safer food
supply.
Exposure to various recreational water
activities was identified as a risk factor for
all of the infections studied. This presents
particularly vexing challenges for control.
A variety of agencies typically regulate different types of recreational water sources.
In Tennessee, for example, swimming
pools are regulated by the Department of
Health, drinking and surface water by different sections in the Department of Environment and Conservation, and other
bodies of water by the US Army Corps of
Engineers or US Forest Service, depending on their location. Frequently such
agencies do not communicate regularly
among themselves or with the public
health agencies that monitor human disease. Mitigating these important risks will
involve major interventions and require
cooperation among a large number of
nontraditional partners, including agriculture, public health, the regulatory sector, and other agencies and groups. As
daunting as this may seem, we cannot afford to ignore factors responsible for population attributable risks of 20%– 40% or
more for bacterial enteric illnesses in children.
The factors Denno et al. [1] found not
to be associated with disease were as provocative as the risk factors identified.
Many of these factors were unexpected.
Interestingly, breast-feeding was not
shown to be protective against most of
these infections, contrary to conventional
wisdom. A variety of investigations have
linked different pathogens with certain
transmission vehicles. Curiously, in this
study of sporadic infection in children,

466

●

JID 2009:199 (15 February)

●

associations were not noted between consumption of chicken or eggs and Salmonella infection, consumption of ground
beef and E. coli O157 infection, and day
care exposure and Shigella infection or
any other pathogens. Once again, findings from this study of sporadic infection
differ from the findings in studies of outbreaks, for reasons that are enigmatic.
Finally, mothers everywhere will be
dismayed at the lack of a protective effect
for hand washing observed in this study,
given its importance as the traditional
cornerstone of infection control. There
are enough other things to confuse the
public with respect to this issue, such as
debates over antibacterial versus nonantibacterial soap, hand sanitizers versus
washing, and whether to recite the alphabet or sing the birthday song while washing to ensure adequate washing time. It is
critical that we quickly get a better understanding of the findings suggested by this
study.
The authors recognize that many of the
findings of their study are limited by sample size and other factors. Nonetheless,
they get an “A” for effort, and they raise a
host of important questions that deserve
additional investigation. The cases involved in this study were identified
through passive surveillance. It is important to remember that the large majority
of children with diarrheal disease never
provide samples for culture (despite
many of them receiving antimicrobial
therapy) [6]. It is often difficult to make a
clinical distinction between viral and bacterial infection, much less among different bacteria, without laboratory testing.
From a public health viewpoint, it is important to have good data on the incidence of various etiologies of enteric in-

EDITORIAL COMMENTARY

fection, along with data on the risk factors
for infection, to assess the overall burden
of disease that might be averted by specific
interventions.
A large proportion of bacterial enteric
infection in children remains preventable. Although traditional consumeroriented education and personal infection control practices are still vitally
important, they will not suffice to reduce
many of the environmental risk factors
that are identified in this study as being at
least as important as food-related exposures. Resources for disease prevention
are limited and must be targeted effectively. The epidemiology of bacterial enteric infection in children is a moving target, and continued vigilance is necessary
to ensure that preventive interventions
keep pace with evolving risk factors
among this high-risk population.

References
1. Denno DM, Keene WE, Hutter CM, et al. Tricounty comprehensive assessment of risk factors for sporadic bacterial reportable enteric
infection in children. J Infect Dis 2009; 199:
467–76 (in this issue).
2. National Restaurant Association. National Industry Fact Sheet 2005. Washington, DC: National Restaurant Association, 2005.
3. Pirog R, Benjamin A. Checking the food
odometer: comparing food miles for local versus conventional produce sales to Iowa institutions. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University,
Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture,
2003.
4. Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dietz V, et al. Foodrelated illness and death in the United States.
Emerg Infect Dis 1999; 5:607–25.
5. Jones TF, Angulo FJ. Eating in restaurants: a
risk factor for foodborne disease? Clin Infect
Dis 2006; 43:1324 – 8.
6. Carpenter LR, Pont SJ, Cooper WO, et al.
Stool cultures and antimicrobial prescriptions
related to infectious diarrhea. J Infect Dis
2008; 197:1709 –12.

