

          Objectives:
        
      
      To assess knowledge, attitude, and practice (KAP), of rural mothers in Karbala, Iraq towards prevention and home management of diarrhoeal diseases among their children, in relation to water sanitation and personal hygiene.
    
      
      Schistosomiasis remains a public health concern across sub-Saharan Africa; current control programmes rely on accurate mapping and high mass drug administration (MDA) coverage to attempt disease elimination. Inter-species hybridisation can occur between certain species, changing epidemiological dynamics within endemic regions, which has the potential to confound control interventions. The impact of hybridisation on disease dynamics is well illustrated in areas of Cameroon where urogenital schistosomiasis, primarily due to Schistosoma haematobium and hybrid infections, now predominate over intestinal schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma guineensis. Genetic markers have shown the ability to identify hybrids, however the underlying genomic architecture of divergence and introgression between these species has yet to be established. In this study, restriction site associated DNA sequencing (RADseq) was used on archived adult worms initially identified as; Schistosoma bovis (n = 4), S. haematobium (n = 9), S. guineensis (n = 3) and S. guineensis x S. haematobium hybrids (n = 4) from Mali, Senegal, Niger, São Tomé and Cameroon. Genome-wide evidence supports the existence of S. guineensis and S. haematobium hybrid populations across Cameroon. The hybridisation of S. guineensis x S. haematobium has not been demonstrated on the island of São Tomé, where all samples showed no introgression with S. haematobium. Additionally, all S. haematobium isolates from Nigeria, Mali and Cameroon indicated signatures of genomic introgression from S. bovis. Adaptive loci across the S. haematobium group showed that voltage-gated calcium ion channels (Cav) could play a key role in the ability to increase the survivability of species, particularly in host systems. Where admixture has occurred between S. guineensis and S. haematobium, the excess introgressive influx of tegumental (outer helminth body) and antigenic genes from S. haematobium has increased the adaptive response in hybrids, leading to increased hybrid population fitness and viability.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Cryptosporidiosis outbreaks in South America are poorly documented. In March 2018, 51 cases of cryptosporidiosis were reported in Maripasoula, a village located in a remote forest area along the border between Surinam and French Guiana.
    
      
      Waterborne diseases account for 1.5 million deaths a year globally, particularly affecting children in low-income households in subtropical areas. It is one of the most enduring and economically devastating biological hazards in our society today. The World Health Organization Health Emergency and Disaster Risk Management (health-EDRM) Framework highlights the importance of primary prevention against biological hazards across all levels of society. The framework encourages multi-sectoral coordination and lessons sharing for community risk resilience. A narrative review, conducted in March 2021, identified 88 English-language articles published between January 2000 and March 2021 examining water, sanitation, and hygiene primary prevention interventions against waterborne diseases in resource-poor settings. The literature identified eight main interventions implemented at personal, household and community levels. The strength of evidence, the enabling factors, barriers, co-benefits, and alternative measures were reviewed for each intervention. There is an array of evidence available across each intervention, with strong evidence supporting the effectiveness of water treatment and safe household water storage. Studies show that at personal and household levels, interventions are effective when applied together. Furthermore, water and waste management will have a compounding impact on vector-borne diseases. Mitigation against waterborne diseases require coordinated, multi-sectoral governance, such as building sanitation infrastructure and streamlined waste management. The review showed research gaps relating to evidence-based alternative interventions for resource-poor settings and showed discrepancies in definitions of various interventions amongst research institutions, creating challenges in the direct comparison of results across studies.
    
      
      Sub-Saharan African countries, like many other low-income countries, have experienced urban socioeconomic inequalities due to rapid and unplanned urbanization. These processes have resulted in the creation of poor urban areas lacking basic sanitation, water, and hygiene facilities, and subjacent public health issues such as the spread of waterborne diseases. A system for the demarcation of disease transmission areas already exists, but the traditional framework is less appropriate in sub-Saharan Africa, making it necessary to divide these urban areas more adequately. In addition, the construction of frameworks and tools more specific to waterborne disease-related issues is essential. We propose restructuring sub-Saharan urban areas into more specific areas of exposure to waterborne diseases and associated exposomes, and then use this restructuring of urban areas of exposure to waterborne diseases in a conceptual framework that takes into account causes of exposure, impacts, and interventions. The division of urban areas into public, domestic, and individual exposure areas facilitates a more straightforward understanding of the dynamics of waterborne exposomes. Moreover, the inclusion of this division in the driving force-pressure-state-exposure-effect-action framework allows an effective stratified implementation of urban public health policies.
    
      
      BackgroundWaterborne disease outbreaks (WBDO) associated with tap water consumption are probably underestimated in France.AimIn order to improve their detection, Santé publique France launched a surveillance system in 2019, based on the periodical analysis of health insurance data for medicalised acute gastroenteritis (mAGE).MethodsSpatio-temporal cluster detection methods were applied to mAGE cases to prioritise clusters for further investigation. These investigations determined the plausibility that infection is of waterborne origin and the strength of association.ResultsBetween January 2010 and December 2019, 3,323 priority clusters were detected (53,878 excess mAGE cases). They involved 3,717 drinking water supply zones (WSZ), 15.4% of all French WSZ. One third of these WSZ (33.4%; n = 1,242 WSZ) were linked to repeated clusters. Moreover, our system detected 79% of WBDO voluntarily notified to health authorities.ConclusionEnvironmental investigations of detected clusters are necessary to determine the plausibility that infection is of waterborne origin. Consequently, they contribute to identifying which WSZ are linked to clusters and for which specific actions are needed to avoid future outbreaks. The surveillance system incorporates three priority elements: linking environmental investigations with water safety plan management, promoting the systematic use of rainfall data to assess waterborne origin, and focusing on repeat clusters. In the absence of an alternative clear hypothesis, the occurrence of a mAGE cluster in a territory completely matching a distribution zone indicates a high plausibility of water origin.
    
      
      Many Cameroonian cities lack access to potable drinking water where populations rely on alternative water sources of doubtful quality. This study aimed at describing the trends and patterns of waterborne diseases (WBDs) reported in some health facilities in Bamboutos Division between 2013 and 2017 as baseline data towards understanding the profile of WBDs in this area. A retrospective review of clinical data kept on patients who visited the main health facilities in Bamboutos Division from January 2013 to December 2017 was conducted. Overall, 39.1% (n = 8,124) of total patients were positive for at least one WBD. Categories of WBDs were dysenteries (18.6%), gastroenteritis (4.2%), viral hepatitis (0.2%) and typhoid was the most preponderant (24.4%). The most affected age groups were those above 24 years but significant differences were observed only in 2013 and 2017. Distribution of potential WBDs was locality dependent. The highest prevalence of typhoid fever was recorded in Bameboro (35.4%), dysenteries in Bamedjinda (20.4%) and gastroenteritis (17.3%) in Bamekoumbou. The study shows very high overall prevalence of WBDs in some localities which could be considered as 'hotspots' of WBDs in Bamboutos. This suggests the urgent need for setting up measures to tackle the challenges of potable drinking water supply.
    

          Introduction:
        
      
      On 15 June 2020, the National Public Health Organization was informed about the identification of two cases of Escherichia coli Ο157 infection in a small town in the Peloponnese Region in Greece and we suspected an outbreak.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Waterborne outbreaks are still a risk in high-income countries, and their early detection is crucial to limit their societal consequences. Although syndromic surveillance is widely used for the purpose of detecting outbreaks days earlier than traditional surveillance systems, evidence of the effectiveness of such systems is lacking. Thus, our objective was to conduct a systematic review of the effectiveness of syndromic surveillance to detect waterborne outbreaks.
    
      
      The presence of intestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli in drinking water is well recognized as a risk for diarrhea. The role of drinking water in extraintestinal infections caused by E. coli-such as urinary tract infections (UTIs)-remains poorly understood. Urinary tract infections are a leading cause of outpatient infections globally, with a lifetime incidence of 50-60% in adult women. We reviewed the scientific literature on the occurrence of uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) in water supplies to determine whether the waterborne route may be an important, overlooked, source of UPEC. A limited number of studies have assessed whether UPEC isolates are present in drinking water supplies, but no studies have measured whether their presence in water may increase UPEC colonization or the risk of UTIs in humans. Given the prevalence of drinking water supplies contaminated with E. coli across the globe, efforts should be made to characterize UTI-related risks associated with drinking water, as well as other pathways of exposure.
    
      
      Investment in sanitation and drinking water infrastructure is essential for universal access to these services in developing countries. Universal coverage of water and sanitation services (WSS) can prevent the dissemination of waterborne diseases and mitigate their adverse effects. These diseases are responsible for many deaths worldwide, especially among the disadvantaged population and children. A causal effect can be established between WSS investment and hospital admissions due to waterborne diseases. Therefore, we considered an innovative network-DEA approach that models the link between serially connected subsystems (upstream investment and downstream hospitalizations). This approach allowed us: to measure the efficiency of both subsystems; estimate the amount of (efficient) investment necessary to universalize the access to proper WSS infrastructure; and mitigate hospital admissions due to waterborne diseases. We used the Brazil case study to test our model. On average, Brazilian states could increase the number of people not requiring hospitalizations due to waterborne diseases by 157 thousand per R$100 million invested in sanitation and 26 thousand per R$100 million invested in drinking water. Our results suggest that relatively small (efficient) investment in those two infrastructure types has a massive impact on hospitalizations. This impact would be more significant than the investment in WSS coverage. Therefore, if safely managed, WSS would cover all citizens, and Brazil would come closer to developed countries.
    
      
      Guinea worm (GW) disease, caused by Dracunculus medinensis, is an almost eradicated waterborne zoonotic disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) currently lists GW as endemic in only five African countries. In July 2020, the Vietnamese public health surveillance system detected a hanging worm in a 23-year-old male patient, who did not report any travel to Africa or any country previously endemic for GW. The patient was hospitalized with symptoms of fatigue, anorexia, muscle aches, and abscesses, with worms hanging out of the skin in the lower limbs. The worms were retrieved from the lesions and microscopically examined in Vietnam, identifying structures compatible with Dracunculus spp. and L1-type larvae. A section of this parasite was sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, United States, for confirmatory diagnosis of GW. The adult worm had cuticle structures compatible with Dracunculus parasites, although the length of L1 larvae was about 339 μm, substantially shorter than D. medinensis. DNA sequence analysis of the 18S small subunit rRNA gene confirmed that this parasite was not GW, and determined that the sample belonged to a Dracunculus sp. not previously reported in GenBank that clustered with the animal-infective Dracunculus insignis and Dracunculus lutrae, located in a different clade than D. medinensis. This study highlights the importance of effective public health surveillance systems and the collaborative work of local public health authorities from Vietnam with the WHO and CDC in efforts to achieve the eradication of GW.
    
      
      A variety of pathogenic microorganisms can survive in the drinking water distribution systems (DWDS) by forming stable biofilms and, thus, continually disseminating their population through the system's dynamic water bodies. The ingestion of the pathogen-contaminated water could trigger a broad spectrum of illnesses and well-being-related obstacles. These waterborne diseases are a significant concern for babies, pregnant women, and significantly low-immune individuals. This review highlights the recent advances in understanding the microbiological aspects of drinking water quality, biofilm formation and its dynamics, health issues caused by the emerging microbes in biofilm, and approaches for biofilm investigation its prevention and suppression in DWDS.
    
      
      Water contamination by pathogenic bacteria is a major public health concern globally. Monitoring bacterial contamination in water is critically important to protect human health, but this remains a critical challenge. Engineered whole-cell biosensors created through synthetic biology hold great promise for rapid and cost-effective detection of waterborne pathogens. In this study, we created a novel whole-cell biosensor to detect water contamination by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia pseudomallei, which are two critical bacterial pathogens and are recognized as common causative agents for waterborne diseases. The biosensor detects the target bacterial pathogens by responding to the relevant quorum sensing signal molecules. Particularly, this study constructed and characterized the biosensor on the basis of the QscR quorum sensing signal system for the first time. We first designed and constructed a QscR on the basis of the sensing module in the E. coli host cell and integrated the QscR sensing module with a reporting module that expressed an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP). The results demonstrated that the biosensor had high sensitivity in response to the quorum sensing signals of the target bacterial pathogens. We further engineered a biosensor that expressed a red pigment lycopene in the reporting module to produce a visible signal readout for the pathogen detection. Additionally, we investigated the feasibility of a paper-based assay by immobilizing the lycopene-based whole-cell biosensor on paper with the aim to build a prototype for developing portable detection devices. The biosensor would provide a simple and inexpensive alternative for timely and point-of-care detection of water contamination and protect human health.
    
      
      Understanding the water consumption patterns within a specific population informs development of increasingly accurate, spatially specific exposure and/or risk assessment of waterborne infection. The current study examined the consumption patterns of private well users in Ontario while considering potentially influential underlying sociodemographics, household characteristics, and experiential factors. A province-wide online survey was circulated between May and August 2018 (n = 1,162). Overall, 81.5% of respondents reported daily well water consumption (i.e., tap water). Results indicate a mean daily well water consumption rate of 1,132 mL/day (SD = 649 mL/day) among well water consumers. Gender was significantly associated with well water consumption, with higher consumption rates found among female respondents. The experience of acute gastrointestinal illness (AGI) symptoms or diagnosis in the past 12 months did not impact the volume of water consumed, suggesting that experiencing previous AGI does not decrease consumption volumes, and therefore exposure over time. Significantly higher rates of well water consumption were found among respondents who reported previous testing or ongoing water treatment. Approximately 45.5% of survey respondents who stated that they do not consume well water selected bottled water as their primary household drinking water supply. Bottled water consumption was also not associated with previous AGI experiences. Findings will inform future quantitative microbial risk assessments associated with private well water use by providing spatially and demographically specific estimates of well water consumption.
    
      
      Provision of safe drinking water in the United States is a great public health achievement. However, new waterborne disease challenges have emerged (e.g., aging infrastructure, chlorine-tolerant and biofilm-related pathogens, increased recreational water use). Comprehensive estimates of the health burden for all water exposure routes (ingestion, contact, inhalation) and sources (drinking, recreational, environmental) are needed. We estimated total illnesses, emergency department (ED) visits, hospitalizations, deaths, and direct healthcare costs for 17 waterborne infectious diseases. About 7.15 million waterborne illnesses occur annually (95% credible interval [CrI] 3.88 million-12.0 million), results in 601,000 ED visits (95% CrI 364,000-866,000), 118,000 hospitalizations (95% CrI 86,800-150,000), and 6,630 deaths (95% CrI 4,520-8,870) and incurring US $3.33 billion (95% CrI 1.37 billion-8.77 billion) in direct healthcare costs. Otitis externa and norovirus infection were the most common illnesses. Most hospitalizations and deaths were caused by biofilm-associated pathogens (nontuberculous mycobacteria, Pseudomonas, Legionella), costing US $2.39 billion annually.
    
      
      Tap water contamination is a growing concern in healthcare facilities, and despite chlorination, tap water in these facilities contains several pathogenic microorganisms causing healthcare-associated waterborne infections or nosocomial outbreaks. Shower units are particularly prone to contamination as they are conducive for bacterial growth and can even produce bioaerosols containing pathogenic bacteria. Shower units coupled with point-of-use (POU) water filters are a simple and safe option; however, their efficacy has been under-reported. Therefore, we determined the efficacy of showerheads attached with a POU filter capsule in preventing infections in our hospital. We investigated the presence of pathogenic bacteria in water sampled from three shower units. After replacing the original shower units with new ones incorporated with a sterile-grade water filter capsule (0.2 µm; QPoint™), the water samples were analyzed for up to 2 months. The POU filters removed several pathogenic bacteria (Mycobacterium, Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Aeromonas, and Klebsiella spp.). Filter effectiveness depends on regional water quality and we believe that effective tap water treatment combined with the use of POU filters (introduced at a reasonable cost in healthcare facilities) can considerably minimize waterborne diseases in hospitals and improve patient care.
    
      
      Variation in free-living microparasite survival can have a meaningful impact on the ecological dynamics of established and emerging infectious diseases. Nevertheless, resolving the importance of indirect and environmental transmission in the ecology of epidemics remains a persistent challenge. It requires accurately measuring the free-living survival of pathogens across reservoirs of various kinds and quantifying the extent to which interaction between hosts and reservoirs generates new infections. These questions are especially salient for emerging pathogens, where sparse and noisy data can obfuscate the relative contribution of different infection routes. In this study, we develop a mechanistic, mathematical model that permits both direct (host-to-host) and indirect (environmental) transmission and then fit this model to empirical data from 17 countries affected by an emerging virus (SARS-CoV-2). From an ecological perspective, our model highlights the potential for environmental transmission to drive complex, nonlinear dynamics during infectious disease outbreaks. Summarizing, we propose that fitting alternative models with indirect transmission to real outbreak data from SARS-CoV-2 can be useful, as it highlights that indirect mechanisms may play an underappreciated role in the dynamics of infectious diseases, with implications for public health.
    
      
      In June 2017, the Pennsylvania Department of Health (PADOH) was notified of multiple norovirus outbreaks associated with 179 ill individuals who attended separate events held at an outdoor venue and campground over a month period. Epidemiologic investigations were unable to identify a single exposure route and therefore unable to determine whether there was a persistent contamination source to target for exposure mitigation. Norovirus was detected in a fresh recreational water designated swimming area and a drinking water well. A hydrogeological site evaluation suggested a nearby septic leach field as a potential contamination source via ground water infiltration. Geological characterization revealed a steep dip of the bedrock beneath the septic leach field toward the well, providing a viral transport pathway in a geologic medium not previously documented as high risk for viral ground water contamination. The human-associated microbial source tracking (MST) genetic marker, HF183, was used as a microbial tracer to demonstrate the hydrogeological connection between the malfunctioning septic system, drinking water well, and recreational water area. Based on environmental investigation findings, venue management and local public health officials implemented a series of outbreak prevention strategies including discontinuing the use of the contaminated well, issuing a permit for a new drinking water well, increasing portable toilet and handwashing station availability, and promoting proper hand hygiene. Despite the outbreaks at the venue and evidence of ground water contamination impacting nearby recreational water and the drinking water well, no new norovirus cases were reported during a large event one week after implementing prevention practices. This investigation highlights a new application for human-associated MST methods to trace hydrological connections between multiple fecal pollutant exposure routes in an outbreak scenario. In turn, pollutant source information can be used to develop effective intervention practices to mitigate exposure and prevent future outbreaks associated with human fecal contaminated waters.
    
      
      Waterborne diseases have critical public health issues and socioeconomic relevancy worldwide. Various viral pathogens are ordinarily associated with waterborne diseases. Six-year-surveillance (a total of 20 times) of norovirus, hepatitis A virus, group C rotavirus, and enterovirus was conducted at five raw water sampling sites including two lakes (Lakes Soyang and Juam), Hyundo region of Geum River in Daejeon City, and Guui region of Han River in Seoul Metropolitan City and Moolgeum region of Nakdong River in Gimhae City which are located near two water intake plants. In this study, we routinely investigated virus contamination in water samples through reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and integrated cell culture RT-PCR with high sensitivity and specificity. A total 100 samples were tested. Most of the targeted viruses were found in 32% of the samples and at least one of the indicator bacteria was detected in 65% of these occurrences. Among all the detected viruses, enterovirus was the most prevalent with a detection frequency of 12% and 2.71 MPN/10 L on average, while hepatitis A virus was the least prevalent with a detection frequency of 4%. Nearly all of the analyzed viruses (except for group C rotavirus) were present in samples from Han River (the Guui region), Geum River (the Hyundo region), Lake Juam, and Nakdong River (the Moolgeum region), while group C rotavirus was detected in those from the Guui region. During the six-year sampling period, the targeted waterborne viruses in water samples exhibited seasonal patterns in their occurrence that were different from the indicator bacteria levels in the water samples. The fact that they were detected in the five representative Korean water environments makes it necessary to establish the chemical and biological analysis systems for waterborne viruses and sophisticated management systems.
    
      
      Heavy rainfall is associated with increased risk of waterborne disease. However, it is not known whether the risk increment differs between wet and dry regions. We examined this question in New Zealand, which has a wide geographical variation of annual rainfall totals (10th-90th percentile difference ≥3000 mm). We conducted a nested case-crossover study within a prospective child cohort (born in 2009-2010) for assessing transient health effects when modified by longitudinal exposures to rainfall. Short-term heavy rainfall effects on hospitalizations due to enteric bacterial and viral infectious causes at lag of 0-14 days were assessed using a Cox regression model adjusted for daily temperature, relative humidity and evapotranspiration. We derived quantiles of time-weighted long-term rainfall levels at the children's homes and these were added as an interaction term to the short-term effect model. Hospitalization risks were higher two days after heavy rainfall days (hazard ratio [95% confidence interval]: 1.73 [1.10-2.70]). The lowest-observable-adverse-effect-level was detected at the 94th percentile of daily rainfall total. Hospital admissions 1-2 days after heavy rainfall increased most in locations with the lowest and highest long-term rainfall. An interaction of this kind between short-term weather and long-term climate has not been reported previously. It is relevant to climate change risk assessments given global projections of increasing intensity of precipitation, against a background of more severe, and possibly more frequent, droughts and flooding.
    
      
      Enteric infections early in life have been associated with poor linear growth among children in low-resource settings. Point-of-use water treatment technologies provide effective and low-cost solutions to reduce exposure to enteropathogens from drinking water, but it is unknown whether the use of these technologies translates to improvements in child growth. We conducted a community-based randomized controlled trial of two water treatment technologies to estimate their effects on child growth in Limpopo, South Africa. We randomized 404 households with a child younger than 3 years to receive a silver-impregnated ceramic water filter, a silver-impregnated ceramic tablet, a safe-storage water container alone, or no intervention, and these households were followed up quarterly for 2 years. We estimated the effects of the interventions on linear and ponderal growth, enteric infections assessed by quantitative molecular diagnostics, and diarrhea prevalence. The silver-impregnated ceramic water filters and tablets consistently achieved approximately 1.2 and 3 log reductions, respectively, in total coliform bacteria in drinking water samples. However, the filters and tablets were not associated with differences in height (height-for-age z-score differences compared with no intervention: 0.06, 95% CI: -0.29, 0.40, and 0.00, 95% CI: -0.35, 0.35, respectively). There were also no effects of the interventions on weight, diarrhea prevalence, or enteric infections. Despite their effectiveness in treating drinking water, the use of the silver-impregnated ceramic water filters and tablets did not reduce enteric infections or improve child growth. More transformative water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions that better prevent enteric infections are likely needed to improve long-term child growth outcomes.
    
      
      The world is currently facing a serious health burden of waterborne diseases, including diarrhea, gastrointestinal diseases, and systemic illnesses. The control of these infectious diseases ultimately depends on the access to safe drinking water, properly managed sanitation, and hygiene practices. Therefore, ultrasensitive, rapid, and specific monitoring platforms for bacterial pathogens in ambient waters at the point of sample collection are urgently needed. We conducted a literature review on state-of-the-art research of rapid in-field aquatic bacteria detection methods, including cell-based methods, nucleic acid amplification detection methods, and biosensors. The detection performance, the advantages, and the disadvantages of the technologies are critically discussed. We envision that promising monitoring approaches should be automated, real-time, and target-multiplexed, thus allowing comprehensive evaluation of exposure risks attributable to waterborne pathogens and even emerging microbial contaminants such as antibiotic resistance genes, which leads to better protection of public health.
    
      
      Leptospirosis is a re-emerging zoonotic disease of high medical importance that affects humans worldwide. Humans or animals acquire an infection with pathogenic leptospires either by direct contact with infected animals or by indirect contact to contaminated environment. Survival of Leptospira spp. in the environment after having been shed via animal urine is thus a key factor to estimate the risk of infection, but not much is known about the tenacity of pathogenic leptospires. Here, the survival time of both a laboratory strain and a field strain of L. kirschneri serovar Grippotyphosa in animal urine and their tenacity while drying was investigated and compared at different temperatures (15°C-37°C). Leptospira spp. are also often found in rivers and ponds. As the infection risk for humans and animals also depends on the spreading and survival of Leptospira spp. in these environments, the survival of L. kirschneri serovar Grippotyphosa was investigated using a 50-meter-long hose system simulating a water stream. Both strains did not survive in undiluted cattle or dog urine. Comparing different temperatures and dilution media, the laboratory strain survived the longest in diluted cattle urine with a slightly alkaline pH value (3 days), whilst the field strain survived in diluted dog urine with a slightly acid pH value up to a maximum of 24 h. Both strains did not survive drying on a solid surface. In a water stream, leptospires were able to move faster or slower than the average velocity of the water due to their intrinsic mobility but were not able to survive the mechanical damage caused by running water in the hose system. From our results we conclude, that once excreted via animal urine, the leptospires immediately need moisture or a water body to survive and stay infectious.
    

          Purpose:
        
      
      Clean drinking water is essential for public health. The cause of waterborne outbreaks is most often faecal contamination of water from animals or humans. The objective of this resarch was to collect available information on waterborne outbreaks in Iceland for the twenty year period, 1998-2017. Incident of faecal and pathogenic pollution in samples where also collected even though rarely followed by registered outbreak.
    
Waterborne diseases are present major health problems to humanity especially in rural communities where many individuals belong to the lower socioeconomic classes (SECs). The impacts of introducing waterborne disease control measures for such communities are investigated by considering a waterborne disease model. The model is extended by introducing treatment of infected individuals and water purification as control measures. The possible benefits of considering these control measures for the various SECs are investigated. Further analyses show how different degrees of control impact the rate at which waterborne diseases are spread across SECs. The disease control model is validated by using it to study the cholera outbreak in Haiti.

      
      Roseomonas, a genus of pink-pigmented glucose non-fermentative bacteria, has been associated with various primary and hospital-acquired human infections; however, to our knowledge, its nosocomial transmission has never been reported. Clinical and epidemiological investigations were carried out after two cases of R. mucosa bacteremia occurred in our hospital in 2018. Environmental samples were taken of environmental surfaces prone to water contamination in the wards and cultured. The two clinical isolates and all environmental isolates that showed growth of pink colonies were identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry and 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed and fingerprinting software was used to analyze the DNA restriction patterns and determine their similarity. Two patients who developed R. mucosa bacteremia had received care from the same treatment team. Of 126 environmental samples, five showed growth of R. mucosa. Using 80% similarity as the cut-off, PFGE analysis revealed that the isolates from the two patients' blood cultures and three environmental isolates belonged to the same clone. The hospital water environment was contaminated with the same clone of R. mucosa that caused bacteremia in the two patients, suggesting nosocomial transmission linked to contaminated environment. Increased vigilance is needed to monitor the emergence of Roseomonas in healthcare settings.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Infection by hepatitis E virus (HEV) can cause a high burden of morbidity and mortality in countries with poor access to clean water and sanitation. Our study aimed to investigate the situation of HEV infections in the Central African Republic (CAR).
    
      
      Construction activities are a known risk contributing to the growth and spread of waterborne pathogens in building water systems. The purpose of the study is to integrate evidence for categorizing construction activity risk factors contributing to waterborne disease in community and healthcare settings, establish severity of such risk factors and identify knowledge gaps. Using a systematic review, the inclusion criteria were: 1) studies with disease cases suspected to be associated with construction activities and waterborne pathogens, and 2) active construction work described in a community or healthcare setting. Each construction activity risk factor was correlated across all studies with the number of disease cases and deaths to establish risk severity. The eligibility review and quantitative synthesis yielded 31 studies for inclusion (community, n = 7 and healthcare, n = 24). From 1965 to 2016, a total of 894 disease cases inclusive of 112 deaths were associated with nine construction activity risk factors and waterborne pathogens. The present study findings support the need for building owners, water management teams and public health professionals to address construction activity risk factors and the analysis of current knowledge deficiencies within the scope of an ongoing water management program. The impact of construction activities on waterborne disease is preventable and should no longer be considered incidental nor accidental.
    
      
      Burden of disease analyses can quantify the relative impact of different exposures on population health outcomes. Gastroenteritis where the causative pathogen was not determined and respiratory illness resulting from exposure to opportunistic pathogens transmitted by water aerosols have not always been considered in waterborne burden of disease estimates. We estimated the disease burden attributable to nine enteric pathogens, unspecified pathogens leading to gastroenteritis, and three opportunistic pathogens leading primarily to respiratory illness, in Ontario, Canada (population ~14 million). Employing a burden of disease framework, we attributed a fraction of annual (year 2016) emergency department (ED) visits, hospitalisations and deaths to waterborne transmission. Attributable fractions were developed from the literature and clinical input, and unattributed disease counts were obtained using administrative data. Our Monte Carlo simulation reflected uncertainty in the inputs. The estimated mean annual attributable rates for waterborne diseases were (per 100 000 population): 69 ED visits, 12 hospitalisations and 0.52 deaths. The corresponding 5th-95th percentile estimates were (per 100 000 population): 13-158 ED visits, 5-22 hospitalisations and 0.29-0.83 deaths. The burden of disease due to unspecified pathogens dominated these rates: 99% for ED visits, 63% for hospitalisations and 40% for deaths. However, when a causative pathogen was specified, the majority of hospitalisations (83%) and deaths (97%) resulted from exposure to the opportunistic pathogens Legionella spp., non-tuberculous mycobacteria and Pseudomonas spp. The waterborne disease burden in Ontario indicates the importance of gastroenteritis not traced back to a particular pathogen and of opportunistic pathogens transmitted primarily through contact with water aerosols.
    
      
      Leptospirosis is a zoonotic and waterborne disease worldwide. It is a neglected, reemerging disease of global public health importance with respect to morbidity and mortality both in humans and animals. Due to negligence, rapid, unplanned urbanization, and poor sanitation, leptospirosis emerges as a leading cause of acute febrile illness in many of the developing countries. Every individual has a risk of getting infected as domestic and wild animals carry leptospires; the at-risk population varies from the healthcare professionals, animal caretakers, farmers and agricultural workers, fishermen, rodent catchers, water sports people, National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) personnel, people who volunteer rescue operations in flood-affected areas, sanitary workers, sewage workers, etc. The clinical manifestations of leptospirosis range from flu-like illness to acute kidney failure (AKF), pneumonia, jaundice, pulmonary hemorrhages, etc. But many rare and uncommon clinical manifestations are being reported worldwide. This review will cover all possible updates in leptospirosis from occurrence, transmission, rare clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment, and prophylactic measures that are currently available, their advantages and the future perspectives, elaborately. There are less or very few reviews on leptospirosis in recent years. Thus, this work will serve as background knowledge for the current understanding of leptospirosis for researchers. This will provide a detailed analysis of leptospirosis and also help in finding research gaps and areas to focus on regarding future research perspectives.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Climate change is increasing the number and intensity of extreme weather events in many parts of the world. Precipitation extremes have been linked to both outbreaks and sporadic cases of waterborne illness. We have previously shown a link between heavy rain and turbidity to population-level risk of sporadic cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis in a major Canadian urban population. The risk increased with 30 or more dry days in the 60 days preceding the week of extreme rain. The goal of this study was to investigate the change in cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis risk due to climate change, primarily change in extreme precipitation.
    
      
      During a waterborne outbreak of norovirus in Spain, we estimated 50% illness doses for a group of exposed (secretor) persons to be 556 (95% CI 319-957) genome copies/day for norovirus GI and 2,934 (95% CI 1,683-5,044) genome copies/day for norovirus GII. Use of a propidium monoazide viability assay reduced these values.
    
      
      Household water treatment including solar disinfection (SODIS) is recognized worldwide as an important intervention for prevention and control of diarrheal and other waterborne diseases. However, in Ethiopia's countryside, SODIS is not being practiced. Therefore, the objective of this qualitative study conducted in villages of Dabat district in northwest Ethiopia was to explore barriers to and enabling factors for consistent and wider implementation of SODIS. This phenomenological study design included four focus group discussions with 25 parents of children younger than 5 years and interviews with four key informants to elicit their experiences and opinions. ATLAS.ti 8.0 software (GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was used for data organization, and the content was analyzed thematically. Enabling factors were categorized into four themes, such as supportive values for SODIS (positive attitude, advantage of SODIS, and cultural acceptance of SODIS), consistent use of SODIS (community's interest, health education, availability of bright sunlight, and simplicity of the method), participation of family and community in daily implementation of the SODIS process (controlling theft of bottles and recognizing the importance of SODIS technology), and willingness to pay for new polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles. On the other hand, barriers were grouped into three themes such as sociocultural (poor knowledge, hesitation to leave SODIS bottles unguarded outdoor, less attention, and unplanned social events), environmental (cloud, shadow over SODIS bottles, turbidity and leeches in source water, and geographical settings), and behavioral (mishandling of SODIS bottles and drinking water). The analysis of the data revealed that all the participants had positive attitude toward the implementation of SODIS, and it was culturally accepted. They identified the barriers to and enabling factors for the implementation of SODIS. Promoting enabling factors and mitigating barriers are substantially important for consistent implementation of SODIS as a long-term interventional measure widely in rural Ethiopia for the achievement of the goal of safe drinking water for all.
    
      
      Willaertia magna c2c maky is a thermophilic amoeba closely related to the genus Naegleria. This free-living amoeba has the ability to eliminate Legionella pneumophila, which is an amoeba-resisting bacterium living in an aquatic environment. To prevent the proliferation of L. pneumophila in cooling towers, the use of W. magna as natural biocide has been proposed. To provide a better understanding of the W. magna genome, whole-genome sequencing was performed through the study of virulence factors and lateral gene transfers. This amoeba harbors a genome of 36.5 megabases with 18,519 predicted genes. BLASTp analyses reported protein homology between 136 W. magna sequences and amoeba-resistant microorganisms. Horizontal gene transfers were observed based on the basis of the phylogenetic reconstruction hypothesis. We detected 15 homologs of N. fowleri genes related to virulence, although these latter were also found in the genome of N. gruberi, which is a non-pathogenic amoeba. Furthermore, the cytotoxicity test performed on human cells supports the hypothesis that the strain c2c maky is a non-pathogenic amoeba. This work explores the genomic repertory for the first draft genome of genus Willaertia and provides genomic data for further comparative studies on virulence of related pathogenic amoeba, N. fowleri.
    
      
      Human viruses are ubiquitous contaminants in surface waters, where they can persist over extended periods of time. Among the factors governing their environmental persistence, the control (removal or inactivation) by microorganisms remains poorly understood. Here, we determined the contribution of indigenous bacteria and protists to the decay of human viruses in surface waters. Incubation of echovirus 11 (E11) in freshwater from Lake Geneva and seawater from the Mediterranean Sea led to a 2.5-log10 reduction in the infectious virus concentration within 48 h at 22°C, whereas E11 was stable in sterile controls. The observed virus reduction was attributed to the action of both bacteria and protists in the biologically active matrices. The effect of microorganisms on viruses was temperature dependent, with a complete inhibition of microbial virus control in lake water at temperatures of ≤16°C. Among three protist isolates tested (Paraphysomonas sp., Uronema marinum, and Caecitellus paraparvulus), Caecitellus paraparvulus was particularly efficient at controlling E11 (2.1-log10 reduction over 4 days with an initial protist concentration of 103 cells ml-1). In addition, other viruses (human adenovirus type 2 and bacteriophage H6) exhibited different grazing kinetics than E11, indicating that the efficacy of antiviral action also depended on the type of virus. In conclusion, indigenous bacteria and protists in lake water and seawater can modulate the persistence of E11. These results pave the way for further research to understand how microorganisms control human viral pathogens in aquatic ecosystems and to exploit this process as a treatment solution to enhance microbial water safety.IMPORTANCE Waterborne human viruses can persist in the environment, causing a risk to human health over long periods of time. In this work, we demonstrate that in both freshwater and seawater environments, indigenous bacteria and protists can graze on waterborne viruses and thereby reduce their persistence. We furthermore demonstrate that the efficiency of the grazing process depends on temperature, virus type, and protist species. These findings may facilitate the design of biological methods for the disinfection of water and wastewater.
    
      
      We identified a waterborne pseudo-outbreak of Mycobacterium chimaera in our stem cell transplantation center, which likely resulted from biofilm on the aerators of the handwashing machines in each patient's room. Regular replacement of faucet parts can prevent biofilm formation and pseudo-outbreaks of M. chimaera through aerators.
    
      
      Waterborne diseases that originated due to pathogen microorganisms are emerging as a serious global health concern. Therefore, rapid, accurate, and specific detection of these microorganisms (i.e., bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and parasitic pathogens) in water resources has become a requirement of water quality assessment. Significant research has been conducted to develop rapid, efficient, scalable, and affordable sensing techniques to detect biological contaminants. State-of-the-art technology-assisted smart sensors have improved features (high sensitivity and very low detection limit) and can perform in a real-time manner. However, there is still a need to promote this area of research, keeping global aspects and demand in mind. Keeping this view, this article was designed carefully and critically to explore sensing technologies developed for the detection of biological contaminants. Advancements using paper-based assays, microfluidic platforms, and lateral flow devices are discussed in this report. The emerging recent trends, mainly point-of-care (POC) technologies, of water safety analysis are also discussed here, along with challenges and future prospective applications of these smart sensing technologies for water health diagnostics.
    
      
      In developing countries, several diseases spread in human population due to the abundance of houseflies (a kind of carrier). The main reason behind the spread of these diseases is the lack of awareness among peoples regarding the sanitation practices and economic constraints. To understand the dynamics of the spread and control of these diseases, in this paper, we propose a mathematical model by considering logistic growth of houseflies. In the model formulation, it is assumed that houseflies transport the bacteria responsible for the disease transmission from the environment to the edibles of human population. To reduce the density of houseflies and number of infected individuals, an optimization problem is also formulated and analyzed. Numerical simulations are performed to support analytically obtained results.
    
      
      Zoonotic pathogen Escherichia albertii has been identified as the cause of several human disease outbreaks; however, factors such as the general symptoms and incubation period of E. albertii infection have yet to be defined. Therefore, we aimed to determine the unique aspects of E. albertii outbreaks in Japan and to examine the genetic characteristics of the causative pathogen. We studied all known E. albertii outbreaks that occurred in Japan up until 2015, which consisted of five confirmed outbreaks and one putative outbreak (Outbreaks 1-6). Outbreaks were re-examined based on personal communications between researchers in prefectural and municipal public health institutes, and through examination of any published study conducted at the time. Draft genome sequences of outbreak-associated E. albertii isolates were also generated. The most common symptom displayed by patients across the six episodes was watery diarrhea (>80%), followed by abdominal pain (50-84%) and fever (37.0-39.5°C) (26-44%). The estimated average incubation period of E. albertii infection was 12-24 h. We assumed that most of the outbreaks were foodborne or waterborne, with restaurant foods, restaurant water, and boxed lunches being the suspected transmission vehicles. Three of the six outbreak-associated E. albertii isolates possessed intact ETT2 regions, while the remaining isolates contained disrupted ETT2-encoding genes. Virulence gene screening revealed that more than half (44/70) of the tested genes were present in all 5 strains examined, and that each of the strains contained more than 1 gene from 14 out of the 21 groups of virulence genes examined in this study. The five E. albertii strains were classified into four of the five known phylogroups. Therefore, we determined that multiple E. albertii genotypes in Japan have the potential to cause outbreaks of diarrhea, abdominal pain, and/or fever following infection of a human host.
    
      
      Chlorination is a chemical method for water disinfection that has been proved to be highly effective in controlling waterborne diarrheal diseases. Most studies have focused on wells' chlorination or later at household level, whereas there have been relatively few researches evaluating the treatment of reservoirs water. Our study followed a mixed design with a before-and-after comparison. It was conducted in a refugee settlement, Um-Baddah Nevachah, which is located in the western outskirts of Khartoum, Sudan. Baseline total coliform test findings have paired areas of four wells that were labeled as sample or control based on fair coin-tossing. A centrally administered water treatment that contains chlorine was added to intervention wells, whereas the other set was considered as chlorine-free placebo. Data were collected 15 days later from the following four main sources: total coliform count, questionnaire-based experimental data trackers, health center records, and face-to-face interviews. The calculated sample size was 341 with corresponding controls selected by systematic random sampling. We found that both groups' prevalences of waterborne diseases were significantly different before the intervention and they shifted later (p = 0.043 vs. p = 0.496, 95% CI). These findings suggest that reservoir chlorination provides prompt disinfection of well-tank-faucet systems water. Highly credible gastroenteritis is a useful tool to detect cases of gastroenteritis in resources limit settings.
    
      
      Achieving health gains from the U.N. Sustainable Development Goals of universal coverage for water and sanitation will require interventions that can be widely adopted and maintained. Effectiveness-how an intervention performs based on actual use-as opposed to efficacy will therefore be central to evaluations of new and existing interventions. Incomplete compliance-when people do not always use the intervention and are therefore exposed to contamination-is thought to be responsible for the lower-than-expected risk reductions observed from water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions based on their efficacy at removing pathogens. We explicitly incorporated decision theory into a quantitative microbial risk assessment model. Specifically, we assume that the usability of household water treatment (HWT) devices (filters and chlorine) decreases as they become more efficacious due to issues such as taste or flow rates. Simulations were run to examine the tradeoff between device efficacy and usability. For most situations, HWT interventions that trade lower efficacy (i.e., remove less pathogens) for higher compliance (i.e., better usability) contribute substantial reductions in diarrheal disease risk compared to devices meeting current World Health Organization efficacy guidelines. Recommendations that take into account both the behavioral and microbiological properties of treatment devices are likely to be more effective at reducing the burden of diarrheal disease than current standards that only consider efficacy.
    
      
      Cyclone Kenneth was the strongest in the recorded history of the African continent. It landed in the Cabo Delgado province in northern Mozambique on 25 April 2019, causing 45 deaths, destroying approximately 40,000 houses, and leaving 374,000 people in need for assistance, most at risk of acquiring waterborne diseases such as cholera. This short article aims to explain how the resulting cholera outbreak occurred and the response by the government and partner organizations. The outbreak was declared on 2 May 2019, after 14 cases were recorded in Pemba city (11 cases) and the Mecúfi district (3 cases). The disease spread to Metuge, and by the 12th of May 2019, there were 149 cases. Aware of the risk of an outbreak of cholera, the government and partners took immediate action as the cyclone ended, adapting the Cholera Response Plan for Beira, revised after the experience with cyclone Idai (4-21 March 2019). The response relevant to cholera epidemics consisted of social mobilization campaigns for prevention, establishment of treatment centers and units, coordination to improve of water, sanitation and hygiene, and surveillance. By 26 May 2019, 252,448 people were immunized in the area affected by cyclone Kenneth. The recovery process is ongoing but the number of new cases has been reducing, seemingly due to an efficient response, support of several organizations and collaboration of the civil society. Future interventions shall follow the same model of response but the government of Mozambique shall keep a contingency fund to manage disasters such as cyclone Idai and Kenneth. The unlikeliness of two cyclones (Idai and Kenneth) within two months after decades without such kind of phenomena points towards the problem of climate change, and Mozambique needs to prepare effective, proven response plans to combat outbreaks of waterborne diseases due to cyclones.
    
Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous foodborne protozoan that can infect humans at low dose and displays different prevalences among countries in the world. Ingestion of food or water contaminated with small amounts of T. gondii oocysts may result in human infection. However, there are no regulations for monitoring oocysts in food, mainly because of a lack of standardized methods to detect them. The objectives of this study were (i) to develop a reliable method, applicable in biomonitoring, for the rapid detection of infectious oocysts by cell culture of their sporocysts combined with quantitative PCR (sporocyst-CC-qPCR) and (ii) to adapt this method to blue and zebra mussels experimentally contaminated by oocysts with the objective to use these organisms as sentinels of aquatic environments. Combining mechanical treatment and bead beating leads to the release of 84% ± 14% of free sporocysts. The sporocyst-CC-qPCR detected fewer than ten infectious oocysts in water within 4 days (1 day of contact and 3 days of cell culture) compared to detection after 4 weeks by mouse bioassay. For both mussel matrices, oocysts were prepurified using a 30% Percoll gradient and treated with sodium hypochlorite before cell culture of their sporocysts. This assay was able to detect as few as ten infective oocysts. This sporocyst-based CC-qPCR appears to be a good alternative to mouse bioassay for monitoring infectious T. gondii oocysts directly in water and also using biological sentinel mussel species. This method offers a new perspective to assess the environmental risk for human health associated with this parasite.IMPORTANCE The ubiquitous protozoan Toxoplasma gondii is the subject of renewed interest due to the spread of oocysts in water and food causing endemic and epidemic outbreaks of toxoplasmosis in humans and animals worldwide. Displaying a sensitivity close to animal models, cell culture represents a real alternative to assess the infectivity of oocysts in water and in biological sentinel mussels. This method opens interesting perspectives for evaluating human exposure to infectious T. gondii oocysts in the environment, where oocyst amounts are considered to be very small.
    
      
      Extreme weather events (EWEs) are increasing in frequency, posing a greater risk of adverse human health effects. As such, developing sociological and psychological based interventions is paramount to empowering individuals and communities to actively protect their own health. Accordingly, this study compared the efficacy of two established social-cognitive models, namely the Health Beliefs Model (HBM) and Risks-Attitudes-Norms-Abilities-Self-regulation (RANAS) framework, in predicting health behaviours following EWEs. Surface water flooding was used as the exemplar EWE in the current study, due to the increasing incidence of these events in the Republic of Ireland over the past decade. Levels of prior experience with flooding were considered for analyses and comparative tools included a number of variables predicting health behaviours and intervention potential scores (i.e. measure of impact of targeting each model element). Results suggest that the RANAS model provides a robust foundation for designing interventions for any level of experience with an extreme weather event, however, use of the simpler HBM may be more cost-effective among participants unacquainted with an EWE and in relatively infrequent health threat scenarios. Results provide an evidence base for researchers and policymakers to appropriately engage with populations about such threats and successfully promote spatiotemporally appropriate health behaviours in a changing climate.
    
Francisella tularensis is a Gram-negative, intracellular bacterium causing the zoonosis tularemia. This highly infectious microorganism is considered a potential biological threat agent. Humans are usually infected through direct contact with the animal reservoir and tick bites. However, tularemia cases also occur after contact with a contaminated hydro-telluric environment. Water-borne tularemia outbreaks and sporadic cases have occurred worldwide in the last decades, with specific clinical and epidemiological traits. These infections represent a major public health and military challenge. Human contaminations have occurred through consumption or use of F. tularensis-contaminated water, and various aquatic activities such as swimming, canyoning and fishing. In addition, in Sweden and Finland, mosquitoes are primary vectors of tularemia due to infection of mosquito larvae in contaminated aquatic environments. The mechanisms of F. tularensis survival in water may include the formation of biofilms, interactions with free-living amoebae, and the transition to a 'viable but nonculturable' state, but the relative contribution of these possible mechanisms remains unknown. Many new aquatic species of Francisella have been characterized in recent years. F. tularensis likely shares with these species an ability of long-term survival in the aquatic environment, which has to be considered in terms of tularemia surveillance and control.
    
      
      Fecal pollution source tracking (FST) studies the origin of fecal contamination and promotes action to eliminate it to improve human health and environmental sustainability. This work presents the temporal and spatial relations of human mitochondrial DNA (HmtDNA), fecal coliforms (FC) and live microbial biomass (ATP) in seawater during a hepatitis A outbreak among a human coastal population. The study area is approximately 100 km along the coastline of the Biobío Region in the southeastern Pacific (Humboldt Current System, Chile). Total data from the swash zone from summer 2015 to autumn 2016 show there were significant positive log-log correlations between FC and HmtDNA (R = 0.32) and ATP (R = 0.31). These correlations were highest during the austral spring of 2015 (R = 0.53 and 0.58 respectively), when HmtDNA also correlated significantly with ATP (R = 0.86). Maximum average values of the parameters measured in this season showed a temporal-spatial concordance with the peak in the number of hepatitis A cases among the nearby coastal population. FC correlated significantly with HmtDNA (R = 0.98) in the water column of the coastal zone close to Concepción Bay during the austral summer of 2016 and in the swash zone of the bay (R = 0.68) throughout the study period. Hepatitis A virus (HAV) has also been detected in organisms and seawater in Concepción Bay, which is consistent with the high incidence of hepatitis A among the coastal population. The concordance between human fecal pollution in the study area and a seasonal hepatitis A outbreak strongly suggests that HmtDNA and its relation with FC and ATP in the coastal zone of marine environments can be used as a proxy to evaluate the risk of outbreaks of thalassogenic diseases.
    
      
      Water contamination by pathogenic bacteria is a global public health problem. Contamination of surface water utilized to irrigate food products, or for human consumption, causes outbreaks of foodborne and waterborne disease. Of these, those caused by diarrheagenic Escherichia coli (DEC) strains present substantial morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was, therefore, to investigate the microbiological quality of surface water and the presence of DEC strains in different water bodies. A total of 472 water samples were collected from irrigation canal, dam, river, and dike water bodies from January through December 2015 in Sinaloa, a State located in Northwestern Mexico. Our studies demonstrated that 47.0% (222/472) of samples contained thermotolerant coliforms above permissive levels whereas E. coli strains were isolated from 43.6% (206/472). Among these E. coli isolates, DEC strains were identified in 14% (29/206) of samples including in irrigation canal (26/29) and river water (3/29) collected from the northern (83%) and central area (17%). Isolated DEC strains were classified as enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) 34.4% (10/29), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) 31.0% (9/29), diffuse adherent E. coli (DAEC) 27.5% (8/29), and enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) 6.8% (2/29). Moreover, 90% of isolated DEC strains exhibited resistance to at least one commonly prescribed antibiotic in Mexico whereas 17% were multi-drug resistant. In conclusion, the presence of DEC strains in surface water represents a potential source for human infection, and thus routine monitoring of DEC in surface water and other indirect affected areas should be considered at northwestern Mexico.
    
      
      Availability of clean water and adequate sanitation facilities are the principal measures for limiting various waterborne diseases. These basic amenities are critical for health and sustainable socio-economic development. This study attempted to assess the status of water and sanitation facilities and practices of the people living in rural areas of Chandigarh including awareness about the waterborne diseases. The community-based cross-sectional study design was adopted having 300 households across 12 villages of city Chandigarh. A standardized interview schedule was used to collect information related to water uses, storage, water treatment options, water conservation practices, personal hygiene, knowledge about waterborne diseases, and government schemes. The interview schedule was administered with the head of the family as a study approach during the door-to-door survey. Households in rural Chandigarh have municipal water supply for drinking as well as other domestic purposes. The mean per capita water usage was 67 ± 13.4 l. Most (68.6%) of the study participants reported that they do not treat water before drinking and store it in plastic bottles or bucket (58%). The survey shows that 97% of the household had functional toilets in their premises, remaining reported lack of finances, and space for construction as major barriers. Regarding personal hygiene, 83% of respondents wash hands with soap and rest used only water or ash. Observations made under the study highlighted the need to create awareness regarding the role of water and sanitation practices on health including knowledge about various government schemes to improve water quality, sanitation, and hygiene practices for better health.
    
      
      Antibiotic-resistant genes (ARGs) are regarded as emerging environmental pollutants and pose a serious health risk to the human population. Integrons are genetic elements that are involved in the spread of ARGs amongst bacterial species. They also act as reservoirs of these resistance traits, further contributing to the development of multi-drug resistance in several water-borne pathogens. Due to inter- and intra-species transfer, integrons are now commonly reported in important water-borne pathogens such as Vibrio, Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia coli and other opportunistic pathogens. These pathogens exhibit immense diversity in their resistance gene cassettes. The evolution of multiple novel and complex gene cassettes in integrons further suggests the selection and horizontal transfer of ARGs in multi-drug resistant bacteria. Thus, the detection and characterization of these integrons in water-borne pathogens, especially in epidemic and pandemic strains, is of the utmost importance. It will provide a framework in which health authorities can conduct improved surveillance of antibiotic resistance in our natural water bodies. Such a study will also be helpful in developing better strategies for the containment and cure of infections caused by these bacteria.
    
      
      An epidemiological survey conducted among users of water points and medical institutions in the N'djili Kilambu neighborhood of Kinshasa in Democratic Republic of the Congo, indicates that waterborne diseases have already affected more than 60% of the patients admitted to local clinics between 2013 and 2017. In order to raise public and political awareness about this hazardous health issue resulting from the lack of safely managed sanitation systems, this study investigates the microbial quality of drinking water from local water resources. Water samples were collected from nine wells and streams used as drinking sources, and analyzed for Fecal Indicator Bacteria (FIB), including Escherichia coli, Enterococcus, and Total Coliforms. Physicochemical parameters (pH, electrical conductivity, O2, and soluble ions (Na+, K+, PO43-, SO42-, NO3-, NO2-) were also analyzed. Except for NO3- and NO2-, the average concentrations of the physicochemical parameters and dissolved ions generally meet the guidelines for drinking/domestic water quality. By contrast, the results reveal high levels of FIB in the water samples collected during both dry and wet seasons. The contamination is significantly higher during the wet season compared to dry season, due to increased runoff, open defecation practices, and more frequent overflow of onsite sanitation systems and septic tanks.
    

          Objective:
        
      
      Water exposures in healthcare settings and during healthcare delivery can place patients at risk for infection with water-related organisms and can potentially lead to outbreaks. We aimed to describe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) consultations involving water-related organisms leading to healthcare-associated infections (HAIs).
    

          Background:
        
      
      Environmental diarrheagenic enteropathogens, effect of surrounding attributes and disease dynamicity remains far from being conclusively explored. Population flux, poor sanitation and hygienic practice poses potential health threat in diarrhoea endemic tropical countries like India. We aim to identify environmental attributes, seasonality of water-borne enteropathogens and health risk assessment off the river Ganges.
    
      
      Subclinical hypothyroidism (SH), elevation of the level of thyrotrophin with normal thyroid hormones, along with goiter (glandular size > 25g), increased in recent decades. In order to relate the prevalence of goiter and SH with the consumption of groundwater, as a population etiological risk factor, we analyzed 879 clinical histories from a medical center in the city of Glew in the South Buenos Aires suburbs. The population was studied according to age (20 to 60 and 12 to 19 years) and type of water consumed (potable water or groundwater). Groundwater was consumed by 70.5% of the group from 20 to 60 years old (n = 559, 79.9% women) and by 66.3% of the group from 12 to 19 years old (n = 57, 81.4% women In the group of 20 to 60 years, the prevalence of SH in potable water and groundwater users was 1% and 57.8% (p < 0.0001) and the goiter rate of 3.8% and 38.9% (p < 0.0001) respectively; with an attributable risk to groundwater of 57% for HS, and 35% for goiter In the group of 12 to 19 years, the prevalence of SH was 6.9% and 52.6% (p < 0.0001) and goiter 13.8% and 77.2% for the water and groundwater groups (p > 0.0001) respectively, with an attributable risk of 46% for HS y 61% for goiter. The physicochemical analysis showed the presence of nitrates in the range of 24 to 83 mg/l in groundwater and absence in potable water. The increased prevalence of HS and goiter could be due to the thyroid disrupting action of nitrates.
    
      
      The relationship between rainfall, especially extreme rainfall, and increases in waterborne infectious diseases is widely reported in the literature. Most of this research, however, has not formally considered the impact of exposure measurement error contributed by the limited spatiotemporal fidelity of precipitation data. Here, we evaluate bias in effect estimates associated with exposure misclassification due to precipitation data fidelity, using extreme rainfall as an example. We accomplished this via a simulation study, followed by analysis of extreme rainfall and incident diarrheal disease in an epidemiologic study in Ecuador. We found that the limited fidelity typical of spatiotemporal rainfall data sets biases effect estimates towards the null. Use of spatial interpolations of rain-gauge data or satellite data biased estimated health effects due to extreme rainfall (occurrence) and wet conditions (accumulated totals) downwards by 35%-45%. Similar biases were evident in the Ecuadorian case study analysis, where spatial incompatibility between exposed populations and rain gauges resulted in the association between extreme rainfall and diarrheal disease incidence being approximately halved. These findings suggest that investigators should pay greater attention to limitations in using spatially heterogeneous environmental data sets to assign exposures in epidemiologic research.
    
      
      Infectious agents, including bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and molds, may threaten the health of swimming pool bathers. Viruses are a major cause of recreationally-associated waterborne diseases linked to pools, lakes, ponds, thermal pools/spas, rivers, and hot springs. They can make their way into waters through the accidental release of fecal matter, body fluids (saliva, mucus), or skin flakes by symptomatic or asymptomatic carriers. We present an updated overview of epidemiological data on viral outbreaks, a project motivated, among other things, by the availability of improved viral detection methodologies. Special attention is paid to outbreak investigations (source of the outbreak, pathways of transmission, chlorination/disinfection). Epidemiological studies on incidents of viral contamination of swimming pools under non-epidemic conditions are also reviewed.
    
      
      This paper presents a spatial risk analysis of waterborne diseases using analytical hierarchy process that rely on geographical information system (GIS)-automated techniques. We selected nine parameters for assessing waterborne diseases prone areas (WBDP). All the weighted parameter layers were integrated to obtain WBDP map. Of the total WBDP area, 42% area was found under medium category, 34% and 24% area under high and low category, respectively. We have also empirically analysed the factors influencing WBDP areas using regression model. Results revealed that explanatory variables like purification of water, washing hand before drinking and eating, and Surface Water Quality Index (SWQI) are the most influential and positively associated while dipping hand in the vessel is negatively associated with the WBD. Further, WBDP areas were validated by analysing their relationship with the actual incidences of WBD(s). Our study may prove to be beneficial for managing and formulating guidelines for the WBDP areas in similar geographical regions. Abbreviations: GIS: Geographical information system; WBDP: Water borne diseases prone areas; SWQI: Surface water quality index; WBD: Water borne Disease; MDG: Millennium Development Goal; AHP: Analytical hierarchical process; GPS: Global Positioning System; NCR: National Capital Region; IDW: Inverse distance weighted; pH: Potential of Hydrogen; TDS: Total dissolved solid; COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand; BOD: Biochemical Oxygen Demand; TA: Total alkalinity; TH: Total Hardness; Cl: Chlorination; SO4: Sulphate, NO3: Nitrate; FL: Floride; ICMR: Indian Council of Medical Research; ISB: Indian Standards Bureau; RW: Relative weights; WQI: Water Quality Index; DJB: Delhi Jal Board; MDG: Millennium Development Goals; GWQI: Ground Water Quality Index; MCD: Municipality Corporation of Delhi; CPCB: Central Pollution Control Board.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Waterborne diseases are one of the leading causes of mortality in developing countries, and diarrhea alone is responsible for over 1.5 million deaths annually. Such waterborne illnesses most often affect those in impoverished rural communities who rely on rivers for their supply of drinking water. Deaths are most common among infants and the elderly. Without knowledge of which communities are upstream of a community, upstream sanitary and bathing behaviors can never be directly linked to downstream health outcomes including disease outbreaks. Although current GIS technologies can answer the upstream question for a limited number of downstream communities, no systematic way existed of labeling each downstream village with all its upstream contributing villages along river networks or within basins at the large national scale, such as in Indonesia. This limitation prohibits macro analyses of waterborne illness across developing world communities globally.
    
      
      Giardia and Cryptosporidium are both waterborne parasites and leading causes of gastroenteritis. Although specimens from diarrhoeic patients are routinely examined for Cryptosporidium, they are often not examined for Giardia so many cases go undiagnosed. Since 2002, all faecal specimens in Central Lancashire have been tested for infection with Giardia and Cryptosporidium. The aim of this paper is to gain insight into the factors contributing to giardiasis and cryptosporidiosis, including evidence of transmission via drinking water. Our analysis found a higher risk of both conditions for young children and a second peak in risk of giardiasis in adults. There was a significantly higher risk of giardiasis for males and a higher risk of cryptosporidiosis for females. The geographical location was significant, with an increased risk in the north. Residence in an area with increased supply from one water treatment works was a significant predictor for cryptosporidiosis.
    
      
      Drinking water standards in the United States mandate a zero tolerance of generic E. coli in 100 mL of water. The presence of E. coli in drinking water indicates that favorable environmental conditions exist that could have resulted in pathogen contamination. Therefore, the rapid and specific enumeration of E. coli in contaminated drinking water is critical to mitigate significant risks to public health. To meet this challenge, we developed a bacteriophage-based membrane filtration assay that employs novel fusion reporter enzymes to fully quantify E. coli in less than half the time required for traditional enrichment assays. A luciferase and an alkaline phosphatase, both specifically engineered for increased enzymatic activity, were selected as reporter probes due to their strong signal, small size, and low background. The genes for the reporter enzymes were fused to genes for carbohydrate binding modules specific to cellulose. These constructs were then inserted into the E. coli-specific phage T7 which were used to infect E. coli trapped on a cellulose filter. During the infection, the reporters were expressed and released from the bacterial cells following the lytic infection cycle. The binding modules facilitated the immobilization of the reporter probes on the cellulose filter in proximity to the lysed cells. Following substrate addition, the location and quantification of E. coli cells could then be determined visually or using bioluminescence imaging for the alkaline phosphatase and luciferase reporters, respectively. As a result, a detection assay capable of quantitatively detecting E. coli in drinking water with similar results to established methods, but less than half the assay time was developed.
    
      
      Multiple drug resistance and treatment of contaminated water has become a serious issue in past years. Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), being bactericidal, non-toxic, cheap and environment friendly behaviour, have drawn attention to overcome these problems. This study has been designed to synthesise AgNPs from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. AgNPs formation was confirmed by colour change and UV-vis spectroscopy. Furthermore, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy peaks demonstrated the presence of capped proteins as reducing and stabilising agent. Transmission electron microscopy micrograph revealed spherical shape AgNPs with the size ranging between 10 and 20 nm. Antibacterial activity of AgNPs was evaluated against the most prevalent waterborne pathogens enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli and Salmonellae typhimurium. Moreover, the antibacterial activity of AgNPs was tested for the treatment of contaminated water which showed attenuation in bacterial load within 8 h as demonstrated by growth kinetics data. Furthermore, AgNPs did not exhibit haemolytic effects on human red blood cells (RBCs) even at 100 mg L-1 concentration of AgNPs. The results herein suggest that AgNPs synthesised by P. aeruginosa under optimised conditions exhibit microbicidal property against waterborne pathogens and having no toxic effect on human RBCs. These AgNPs could be employed for treatment of contaminated water after process optimisation.
    
      
      The growth of the world population has increased the demand for water. On the other hand, climate change shows us that the water sources that were previously safe are not anymore. There are inequalities between urban and rural areas, thus 96% of the urban world population uses drinking water sources compared to 84% of the rural population, while 82% of the urban population versus 51% of the rural population use sanitation facilities. In Peru, 80.4% of homes are supplied with water through a public network. In the urban area, this service covers 83.2%; while in the rural area 71.3% of homes have a toilet service connected to the public network. All the above conditions the presence of water-related infectious diseases, such as diarrhea, malaria, dengue, leptospirosis, viral hepatitis A, and E, whose classification is shown in this article. In the world, diarrhea is the third cause of death among children under five years of age and more than 340,000 children under the age of five die from diarrheal diseases due to poor sanitation. One of the goals of the SDGs is related to universal access drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, which cannot be achieved without due attention to the inequalities in access observed between different groups, avoiding the consequences of these deficiencies both in our country and in the world.
    
      
      Climate change is predicted to have a major impact on people's lives with the recent extreme weather events and varying abnormal temperature profiles across the world raising concerns. The impacts of global warming are already being observed, from rising sea levels and melting snow and ice to changing weather patterns. Scientists state unequivocally that these trends cannot be explained by natural variability in climate alone. Human activities, especially the burning of fossil fuels, have warmed the earth by dramatically increasing concentrations of heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere; as these concentrations increase, the more the earth will warm. Climate change and related extreme weather events are being exacerbated sooner than has previously been considered and are already adversely affecting ecosystems and human health by increasing the burden and type of disease at a local level. Changes to the marine environment and freshwater supplies already affect significant parts of the world's population and warmer temperatures, especially in more temperate regions, may see an increased spread and transmission of diseases usually associated with warmer climes including, for example, cholera and malaria; these impacts are likely to become more severe in a greater number of countries. This review discusses the impacts of climate change including changes in infectious disease transmission, patterns of waterborne diseases and the likely consequences of climate change due to warmer water, drought, higher rainfall, rising sea levels and flooding.
    
      
      Vibrio vulnificus is a Gram-negative, curved, obligate halophilic marine bacterium that exclusively exists in coastal seawaters. Previous studies revealed that V. vulnificus is one of the most dangerous foodborne zoonotic pathogens for human beings. However, it remains unknown whether marine mammals can be infected by V. vulnificus. In May 2016, a captive spotted seal (Phoca largha) died due to septicemia induced by V. vulnificus. Upon post-mortem examination, V. vulnificus was isolated, identified, and named as BJ-PH01. Further analysis showed that BJ-PH01 belongs to biotype 1 and the Clinical genotype. Furthermore, we performed an epidemiological investigation of V. vulnificus in six aquariums in northern China. As a result, V. vulnificus was successfully isolated from all investigated aquariums. The positive rates ranged from 20% to 100% in each investigated aquarium. During the investigation, 12 strains of V. vulnificus were isolated, and all 12 isolates were classified into biotype 1. Eleven of the 12 isolates belonged to the Clinical genotype, and one isolate belonged to the Environmental genotype. All 12 isolated V. vulnificus strains showed limited antibiotic resistance. Overall, our work demonstrated that V. vulnificus is frequently distributed in aquariums, thus constituting a threat to captive marine mammals and to public health.
    
      
      Gram-negative bacilli Vibrio spp., Aeromonas spp., and Shewanella spp. are a major cause of severe waterborne infection. The aim of this study was to assess the clinical and microbiological characteristics and prognosis of patients hospitalized in Reunion Island for a waterborne infection. This retrospective study was conducted in the two university hospitals of Reunion Island between January 2010 and March 2017. Patients diagnosed with a Vibrio, Aeromonas, or Shewanella infection were evaluated. Over the study period, 112 aquatic strains were isolated at Reunion Island: Aeromonas spp. were found in 91 patients (81.3%), Shewanella spp. in 13 patients (11.6%), and Vibrio spp. in eight patients (7.2%). The in-hospital mortality rate was 11.6%. The main sites of infection were skin and soft tissue (44.6%) and the abdomen (19.6%). Infections were polymicrobial in 70 cases (62.5%). The most commonly prescribed empiric antibiotic regimen was amoxicillin-clavulanate (34.8%). Eighty-four percent of the aquatic strains were resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanate and more than > 95% were susceptible to third or fourth generation cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones. After multivariate analysis, the only independent risk factor of in-hospital mortality was the presence of sepsis (P < 0.0001). In Reunion Island, the most commonly isolated aquatic microorganisms were Aeromonas spp. Sepsis caused by aquatic microorganisms was frequent (> 50%) and associated with higher in-hospital mortality. This study suggests that empiric antibiotic regimens in patients with sepsis or septic shock caused by suspected aquatic microorganisms (tropical climate, skin lesion exposed to seawater…) should include broad-spectrum antibiotics (third or fourth generation cephalosporins).
    
      
      Waterborne disease outbreaks (WBDOs) remain a public health issue in developed countries, but to date the surveillance of WBDOs in France, mainly based on the voluntary reporting of clusters of acute gastrointestinal infections (AGIs) by general practitioners to health authorities, is characterized by low sensitivity. In this context, a detection algorithm using health insurance data and based on a space⁻time method was developed to improve WBDO detection. The objective of the present simulation-based study was to evaluate the performance of this algorithm for WBDO detection using health insurance data. The daily baseline counts of acute gastrointestinal infections were simulated. Two thousand simulated WBDO signals were then superimposed on the baseline data. Sensitivity (Se) and positive predictive value (PPV) were both used to evaluate the detection algorithm. Multivariate regression was also performed to identify the factors associated with WBDO detection. Almost three-quarters of the simulated WBDOs were detected (Se = 73.0%). More than 9 out of 10 detected signals corresponded to a WBDO (PPV = 90.5%). The probability of detecting a WBDO increased with the outbreak size. These results underline the value of using the detection algorithm for the implementation of a national surveillance system for WBDOs in France.
    
      
      Quantifying sporadic waterborne infections in community settings can be challenging. Salivary antibody immunoassays are a promising non-invasive tool that can be used in prospective studies of common infections, especially those involving children. This study was conducted in a Massachusetts city, which uses a microbiologically contaminated river as its water source, during summer-early winter periods before and after construction of a new drinking water treatment plant. Monthly saliva samples (7480 samples from 1170 children and 816 adults) were analyzed for immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses to recombinant proteins of Cryptosporidium, one genogroup I (GI) and two GII noroviruses. Immunoconversion was defined as at least four-fold increase in specific antibody responses between two monthly samples with a post-conversion response above a flexible age-dependent cut-off. Episodes of gastroenteritis (diarrhea or vomiting or cramps) were associated with 3.2 (95% confidence limits 1.1; 9.5) adjusted odds ratio (aOR) of immunoconversion to Cryptosporidium; episodes of combined diarrhea and vomiting symptoms were associated with 3.5 (0.8; 15.0) and 4.6 (1.7; 12.6) aORs of an immunoconversion to GI and GII noroviruses, respectively. Swimming in natural water bodies or chlorinated pools was associated with 2.3 (0.4; 15.4) and 4.9 (1.6; 15.5) aORs of immunoconversion to Cryptosporidium, respectively. In a subset of study participants who did not use home water filters, consumption of at least some amount of non-boiled tap water reported in a monthly recall survey was associated with 11.1 (1.2; 100.0) and 0.6 (0.1; 2.5) aORs of immunoconversion to Cryptosporidium before and after the new water treatment plant construction, respectively. Among individuals who used home water filters, associations between non-boiled tap water consumption and Cryptosporidium immunoconversion were not significant before and after new plant construction with aORs of 0.8 (0.2; 3.3) and 0.3 (0.1; 1.6), respectively. The interaction effect of study phase and non-boiled tap water consumption on Cryptosporidium immunoconversions was statistically significant in the entire study population with aOR of 5.4 (1.1; 25.6). This was the first study that has used a salivary antibody immunoassay to demonstrate significant associations between gastrointestinal symptoms and Cryptosporidium and norovirus infections, and between water-related exposures and Cryptosporidium infections.
    
      
      Quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) is a relatively new approach in identifying health risks associated with the ubiquitous presence of pathogens and opportunists in the human environment. The methodology builds on experimental and meta-analytical data to identify measurable factors that contribute to, and can quantify, the likely extent of disease given a particular exposure. Early modelling was particularly focused on food-borne disease, and subsequently water-borne disease, with the emphasis focused on ingestion and its role in enteric disease. More recently, there has been a focus on translating these principles to opportunist waterborne infections (OWI) with primary focus on Legionella spp. Whereas dose and susceptibility are well documented via the ingestion route of exposure there is considerably less certainty regarding both factors when understanding Legionella spp. and other OWI. Many OWI can arise through numerous routes of transmission with greatly differing disease presentations. Routes of Legionella spp. infection do not include ingestion, but rather aspiration and inhalation of contaminated water are the routes of exposure. The susceptible population for OWI is a vulnerable sub-set of the population unlike those associated with enteric disease pathogens. These variabilities in dose, exposure and susceptibility call in to question whether QMRA can be a useful tool in managing risks associated with OWI. Consideration of Legionella spp. as a well-documented subject of research calls into question whether QMRA of OWI is likely to be a useful tool in developing risk management strategies.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Bidens pilosa and Dichrostachys cinerea extracts were investigated for the antibacterial properties against waterborne diarrhoeagenic bacteria.
    

          Purpose:
        
      
      Climate change threatens progress achieved in global reductions of infectious disease rates over recent decades. This review summarizes literature on potential impacts of climate change on waterborne diseases, organized around a framework of questions that can be addressed depending on available data.
    
Leptospira interrogans is the etiological agent of leptospirosis, a globally distributed zoonotic disease. Human infection usually occurs through skin exposure with water and soil contaminated with the urine of chronically infected animals. In this study, we aimed to quantitatively characterize the survival of Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni in environmental matrices. We constructed laboratory microcosms to simulate natural conditions and determined the persistence of DNA markers in soil, mud, spring water and sewage using a quantitative PCR (qPCR) and a propidium monoazide (PMA)-qPCR assay. We found that L. interrogans does not survive at high concentrations in the tested matrices. No net growth was detected in any of the experimental conditions and in all cases the concentration of the DNA markers targeted decreased from the beginning of the experiment following an exponential decay with a decreasing decay rate over time. After 12 and 21 days of incubation the spiked concentration of 106L. interrogans cells/ml or g decreased to approximately 100 cells/ml or g in soil and spring water microcosms, respectively. Furthermore, culturable L. interrogans persisted at concentrations under the limit of detection by PMA-qPCR or qPCR for at least 16 days in soil and 28 days in spring water. Altogether, our findings suggest that the environment is not a multiplication reservoir but a temporary carrier of L. interrogans Copenhageni, although the observed prolonged persistence at low concentrations may still enable the transmission of the disease.IMPORTANCE Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by spirochetes of the genus Leptospira that primarily affects impoverished populations worldwide. Although leptospirosis is transmitted by contact with water and soil, little is known about the ability of the pathogen to survive in the environment. In this study, we quantitatively characterized the survival of L. interrogans in environmental microcosms and found that although it cannot multiply in water, soil or sewage, it survives for extended time periods (days to weeks depending on the matrix). The survival parameters obtained here may help to better understand the distribution of pathogenic Leptospira in the environment and improve the predictions of human infection risks in areas where such infections are endemic.
    
      
      In May 2016 a Norovirus (NoV) gastroenteritis outbreak involved a high school class visiting a seaside resort near Taormina (Mascali, Sicily). Twenty-four students and a teacher were affected and 17 of them showed symptoms on the second day of the journey, while the others got ill within the following 2 days. Symptoms included vomiting, diarrhoea and fever, and 12 students required hospitalisation. Stool samples tested positive for NoV genome by Real-Time polymerase chain reaction assay in all 25 symptomatic subjects. The GII.P2/GII.2 NoV genotype was linked to the outbreak by ORF1/ORF2 sequence analysis. The epidemiological features of the outbreak were consistent with food/waterborne followed by person-to-person and/or vomit transmission. Food consumed at a shared lunch on the first day of the trip was associated to illness and drinking un-bottled tap water was also considered as a risk factor. The analysis of water samples revealed the presence of bacterial indicators of faecal contamination in the water used in the resort as well as in other areas of the municipal water network, linking the NoV gastroenteritis outbreak to tap water pollution from sewage leakage. From a single water sample, an amplicon whose sequence corresponded to the capsid genotype recovered from patients could be obtained.
    
      
      Historically in developed countries, reported hepatitis E cases were typically travellers returning from countries where hepatitis E virus (HEV) is endemic, but now there are increasing numbers of non-travel-related ("autochthonous") cases being reported. Data for HEV in New Zealand remain limited and the transmission routes unproven. We critically reviewed the scientific evidence supporting HEV transmission routes in other developed countries to inform how people in New Zealand may be exposed to this virus. A substantial body of indirect evidence shows domesticated pigs are a source of zoonotic human HEV infection, but there is an information bias towards this established reservoir. The increasing range of animals in which HEV has been detected makes it important to consider other possible animal reservoirs of HEV genotypes that can or could infect humans. Foodborne transmission of HEV from swine and deer products has been proven, and a large body of indirect evidence (e.g. food surveys, epidemiological studies and phylogenetic analyses) support pig products as vehicles of HEV infection. Scarce data from other foods suggest we are neglecting other potential sources of foodborne HEV infection. Moreover, other transmission routes are scarcely investigated in developed countries; the role of infected food handlers, person-to-person transmission via the faecal-oral route, and waterborne transmission from recreational contact or drinking untreated or inadequately treated water. People have become symptomatic after receiving transfusions of HEV-contaminated blood, but it is unclear how important this is in the overall hepatitis E disease burden. There is need for broader research efforts to support establishing risk-based controls.
    
      
      Determining the conditions that favor pathogen establishment in a host community is key to disease control and eradication. However, focusing on long-term dynamics alone may lead to an underestimation of the threats imposed by outbreaks triggered by short-term transient phenomena. Achieving an effective epidemiological response thus requires to look at different timescales, each of which may be endowed with specific management objectives. In this work we aim to determine epidemicity thresholds for some prototypical examples of water-borne and water-related diseases, a diverse family of infections transmitted either directly through water infested with pathogens or by vectors whose lifecycles are closely associated with water. From a technical perspective, while conditions for endemicity are determined via stability analysis, epidemicity thresholds are defined through generalized reactivity analysis, a recently proposed method that allows the study of the short-term instability properties of ecological systems. Understanding the drivers of water-borne and water-related disease dynamics over timescales that may be relevant to epidemic and/or endemic transmission is a challenge of the utmost importance, as large portions of the developing world are still struggling with the burden imposed by these infections.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Numerous illnesses are associated with bathing in natural waters, although it is assumed that the risk of illness among bathers exposed to relatively clean waters found in high-income countries is negligible. A systematic review was carried out to quantify the increased risk of experiencing a range of adverse health outcomes among bathers exposed to coastal water compared with non-bathers.
    
      
      We investigated the impacts of on-site sanitation systems to local groundwater. In this year-long study, we monitored the response of faecal contamination levels to hydroclimatological factors including rainfall and groundwater table. Concentration of faecal indicators-E. coli (ESC), Enterococcus (ENT), nitrate-in thirteen pairs of shallow and deep wells were determined every 7-14 days. All samples from shallow wells were tested positive for faecal contamination (ESC and ENT > 1 MPN/100 mL) but concentration varies. A maximum of 24,000 MPN/100 mL were recorded in some shallow wells. Water from deep wells showed lower susceptibility to contamination with only 4 and 23% of samples tested positive for ESC and ENT, respectively. Concentrations of ESC and ENT were lower too, with a maximum of 5 MPN/100 mL and 28 MPN/100 mL, respectively. Fluctuation in contamination among the wells was described by four archetypal responses to hydroclimatological forcing: (i) flushing during the onset of wet season, (ii) dilution over the course of the wet season, (iii) concentration during the dry season, and (iv) synoptic response to storms. Previous studies attempting to link the prevalence of faecal/waterborne diseases and temporal factors (e.g., dry vs wet season) have produced differing outcomes. Our study may help explain the relevant hydrological mechanisms leading to these varying observations. Presently, most communities in Thailand have access to 'improved' sanitation systems. However, due to the unsustainable implementation of these systems, the otherwise viable drinking-water resources in the form of the abundant local groundwater has become a genuine health hazard.
    
      
      Significant volumes of research over the past four decades has sought to elucidate the social, infrastructural, economic, and human health effects of climate change induced surface flooding. To date, epidemiological and public health studies of flooding events have focused on mental health effects, vector-borne diseases, and infectious enteric disease due to floodwater contact (i.e. typically low consumption rates). The inherent nature of groundwater (i.e. out of sight, out of mind) and the widely held belief that aquifers represent a pristine source of drinking water due to natural attenuation may represent the "perfect storm" causing direct consumption of relatively large volumes of surface flood-contaminated groundwater. Accordingly, the current study sought to systematically identify and synthesize all available peer-reviewed literature pertaining to the nexus between surface flooding, groundwater contamination and human gastroenteric outcomes. Just 14 relevant studies were found to have been published during the period 1980-2017, thus highlighting the fact that this potentially significant source of climate-related exposure to environmental infection has remained understudied to date. Studies differed significantly in terms of type and data reporting procedures, making it difficult to discern clear trends and patterns. Approximately 945 confirmed cases of flood-related enteric disease were examined across studies; these concurred with almost 10,000 suspected cases, equating to approximately 20 suspected cases per confirmed case. As such, no regional, national or global estimates are available for the human gastrointestinal health burden of flood-related groundwater contamination. In light of the demonstrable public health significance of the concurrent impacts of groundwater susceptibility and climate change exacerbation, strategies to increase awareness about potential sources of contamination and motivate precautionary behaviour (e.g. drinking water testing and treatment, supply interruptions) are necessary. Mainstreaming climate adaptation concerns into planning policies will also be necessary to reduce human exposure to waterborne sources of enteric infection.
    
      
      Effective risk management helps ensure safe drinking water and protect public health. Even in high-income countries, risk management sometimes fails and waterborne disease, including outbreaks, occur. To help reduce waterborne disease, the WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality recommend water safety plans (WSPs), a systematic preventive risk management strategy applied from catchment to consumer. Since the introduction of WSPs, international guidelines, national and state legislation, and local practices have facilitated their implementation. While various high-income OECD countries have documented successes in improving drinking water safety through implementing WSPs, others have little experience. This review synthesizes the elements of the enabling environment that promoted the implementation of WSPs in high-income countries. We show that guidelines, regulations, tools and resources, public health support, and context-specific evidence of the feasibility and benefits of WSPs are elements of the enabling environment that encourage adoption and implementation of WSPs in high-income countries. These findings contribute to understanding the ways in which to increase the uptake and extent of WSPs throughout high-income countries to help improve public health.
    
      
      The current study aimed to assess the association between socioeconomic conditions, basic sanitation, and coverage by family health teams and hospitalizations for waterborne diseases. The analysis of socioeconomic conditions and sanitation was based on an ecological study with data from the Brazilian National Household Sample Survey (PNAD) and the Brazilian Health Informatics Departament (DATASUS) database (observations for the States and Federal District) for the year 2013. Associations between family health teams and hospitalization were assessed by simple regressions, with data from DATASUS and the Department of Primary Care of Ministry of Health from 1998 to 2014. Connection to the public sewage system, low schooling, and family health team coverage were significantly associated (p < 0.05) with hospitalizations for waterborne diseases. Based on attributable risk analysis, for Brazil as a whole in 2013, 57,574 (16.3%) of hospital admissions for waterborne diseases could have been avoided by adequate sewage disposal, which would also have avoided BRL 20,372,559.90 in treatment costs and 172,722 days lost to hospitalization. The results emphasize the importance of integrated sanitation policies, education, and health care that consider regional inequalities, thereby contributing to improvement of the population's health conditions.
    
      
      Eukaryotic virus-bacteria interactions have recently become an emerging topic of study due to multiple significant examples related to human pathogens of clinical interest. However, such omnipresent and likely important interactions for viruses and bacteria relevant to the applied and agricultural sciences have not been reviewed or compiled. The fundamental basis of this review is that these interactions have importance and deserve more investigation, as numerous potential consequences and applications arising from their discovery are relevant to the applied sciences. The purpose of this review is to highlight and summarize eukaryotic virus-bacteria findings in the food/water, horticultural, and animal sciences. In many cases in the agricultural sciences, mechanistic understandings of the effects of virus-bacteria interactions remain unstudied, and many studies solely focus on co-infections of bacterial and viral pathogens. Given recent findings relative to human viral pathogens, further research related to virus-bacteria interactions would likely result in numerous discoveries and beneficial applications.
    
      
      This study aimed to assess anthropogenic impact of surrounding population in the Private Reserve of Natural Heritage at Pantanal, the world's largest freshwater wetland ecosystem located in the centre of South America. Viral aetiological agents of acute gastroenteritis as rotavirus A (RVA), noroviruses, human adenoviruses, klassevirus and of hepatitis, as hepatitis A virus, were investigated in different aquatic matrices. Annual collection campaigns were carried out from 2009 to 2012, alternating dry and rainy seasons. Viral particles present in the samples were concentrated by the adsorption-elution method, with negatively charged membranes, and detected by qualitative and quantitative PCR. From a total of 43 samples at least one virus was detected in 65% (28) of them. Viruses were detected in all matrices with concentrations ranging from 2 × 102 to 8·3 × 104 genome copies per litre. A significant higher RVA frequency was observed in the dry season. Our data revealing dissemination of human enteric viruses in water matrices both inside and outside the reserve could be useful to trace faecal contamination in the environment and to minimize the risk of infection by exposure of susceptible individuals.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Activities such as swimming, paddling, motor-boating, and fishing are relatively common on US surface waters. Water recreators have a higher rate of acute gastrointestinal illness, along with other illnesses including respiratory, ear, eye, and skin symptoms, compared to non-water recreators. The quantity and costs of such illnesses are unknown on a national scale.
    
      
      The intrinsic dynamics of bacteria often play an important role in the transmission and spread of waterborne infectious diseases. In this paper, we construct mathematical models for waterborne infections and analyze two types of nontrivial bacterial dynamics: logistic growth, and growth with Allee effects. For the model with logistic growth, we find that regular threshold dynamics take place, and the basic reproduction number can be used to characterize disease extinction and persistence. In contrast, the model with Allee effects exhibits much more complex dynamics, including the existence of multiple endemic equilibria and the presence of backward bifurcation and forward hysteresis.
    
      
      : Workers are uniquely susceptible to the health hazards imposed by environmental changes. Occupational and environmental medicine (OEM) providers are at the forefront of emerging health issues pertaining to working populations including climate change, and must be prepared to recognize, respond to, and mitigate climate change-related health effects in workers. This guidance document from the American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine focuses on North American workers health effects that may occur as a result of climate change and describes the responsibilities of the OEM provider in responding to these health challenges.
    
      
      Continuous and reliable monitoring of water sources for human consumption is imperative for public health. For protozoa, which cannot be multiplied efficiently in laboratory settings, concentration and recovery steps are key to a successful detection procedure. Recently, the use of megasonic energy was demonstrated to recover Cryptosporidium from commonly used water industry filtration procedures, forming thereby a basis for a simplified and cost effective method of elution of pathogens. In this article, we report the benefits of incorporating megasonic sonication into the current methodologies of Giardia duodenalis elution from an internationally approved filtration and elution system used within the water industry, the Filta-Max®. Megasonic energy assisted elution has many benefits over current methods since a smaller final volume of eluent allows removal of time-consuming centrifugation steps and reduces manual involvement resulting in a potentially more consistent and more cost-effective method. We also show that megasonic sonication of G. duodenalis cysts provides the option of a less damaging elution method compared to the standard Filta-Max® operation, although the elution from filter matrices is not currently fully optimised. A notable decrease in recovery of damaged cysts was observed in megasonic processed samples, potentially increasing the abilities of further genetic identification options upon isolation of the parasite from a filter sample. This work paves the way for the development of a fully automated and more cost-effective elution method of Giardia from water samples.
    
      
      Enteric pathogens are commonly known to be transmitted through food or water; however, contact with animals is another important transmission route. This study estimated the annual burden of illness attributable to animal contact for eight enteric pathogens in Canada. Using data from a Canadian expert elicitation on transmission routes, the proportion of enteric illnesses attributable to animal contact was estimated for each pathogen to estimate the annual number of illnesses, hospitalizations and deaths in Canada. For each estimate, a mean and probability intervals were generated. Of all illnesses caused by these eight pathogens, 16% were estimated attributable to animal contact. This estimate translates to 86 000 (31 000-166 000) illnesses, 488 (186-890) hospitalizations and 12 (2-28) deaths annually for the eight pathogens combined. Campylobacter spp. is the leading cause of illnesses annually, with an estimated 38 000 (14 000-71 000) illnesses occurring each year, followed by non-typhoidal Salmonella spp. (17 000, 6000-32 000). The majority of hospitalizations were attributable to non-typhoidal Salmonella spp. (36%) and Campylobacter spp. (31%). Non-typhoidal Salmonella spp. (28%) and Listeria monocytogenes (31%) were responsible for the majority of the estimated deaths. These results identify farm animal and pet/pet food exposure as key pathways of transmission for several pathogens. The estimated burden of illness associated with animal contact is substantial.
    
      
      Provision of safe water in the United States is vital to protecting public health (1). Public health agencies in the U.S. states and territories* report information on waterborne disease outbreaks to CDC through the National Outbreak Reporting System (NORS) (https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/surveillance/index.html). During 2013-2014, 42 drinking water-associated† outbreaks were reported, accounting for at least 1,006 cases of illness, 124 hospitalizations, and 13 deaths. Legionella was associated with 57% of these outbreaks and all of the deaths. Sixty-nine percent of the reported illnesses occurred in four outbreaks in which the etiology was determined to be either a chemical or toxin or the parasite Cryptosporidium. Drinking water contamination events can cause disruptions in water service, large impacts on public health, and persistent community concern about drinking water quality. Effective water treatment and regulations can protect public drinking water supplies in the United States, and rapid detection, identification of the cause, and response to illness reports can reduce the transmission of infectious pathogens and harmful chemicals and toxins.
    
      
      Waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States are associated with a wide variety of water exposures and are reported annually to CDC on a voluntary basis by state and territorial health departments through the National Outbreak Reporting System (NORS). A majority of outbreaks arise from exposure to drinking water (1) or recreational water (2), whereas others are caused by an environmental exposure to water or an undetermined exposure to water. During 2013-2014, 15 outbreaks associated with an environmental exposure to water and 12 outbreaks with an undetermined exposure to water were reported, resulting in at least 289 cases of illness, 108 hospitalizations, and 17 deaths. Legionella was responsible for 63% of the outbreaks, 94% of hospitalizations, and all deaths. Outbreaks were also caused by Cryptosporidium, Pseudomonas, and Giardia, including six outbreaks of giardiasis caused by ingestion of water from a river, stream, or spring. Water management programs can effectively prevent outbreaks caused by environmental exposure to water from human-made water systems, while proper point-of-use treatment of water can prevent outbreaks caused by ingestion of water from natural water systems.
    
      
      National emergency department (ED) visit prevalence and costs for selected diseases that can be transmitted by water were estimated using large healthcare databases (acute otitis externa, campylobacteriosis, cryptosporidiosis, Escherichia coli infection, free-living ameba infection, giardiasis, hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection, Legionnaires' disease, nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) infection, Pseudomonas-related pneumonia or septicemia, salmonellosis, shigellosis, and vibriosis or cholera). An estimated 477,000 annual ED visits (95% CI: 459,000-494,000) were documented, with 21% (n = 101,000, 95% CI: 97,000-105,000) resulting in immediate hospital admission. The remaining 376,000 annual treat-and-release ED visits (95% CI: 361,000-390,000) resulted in $194 million in annual direct costs. Most treat-and-release ED visits (97%) and costs ($178 million/year) were associated with acute otitis externa. HAV ($5.5 million), NTM ($2.3 million), and salmonellosis ($2.2 million) were associated with next highest total costs. Cryptosporidiosis ($2,035), campylobacteriosis ($1,783), and NTM ($1,709) had the highest mean costs per treat-and-release ED visit. Overall, the annual hospitalization and treat-and-release ED visit costs associated with the selected diseases totaled $3.8 billion. As most of these diseases are not solely transmitted by water, an attribution process is needed as a next step to determine the proportion of these visits and costs attributable to waterborne transmission.
    

          Background:
        
      
      In June 2015, a local public health laboratory was notified that students had developed gastroenteritis symptoms after attending a camp. An outbreak investigation was conducted to determine the extent and cause of the outbreak.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Overnight international travels made by Finns more than doubled during 1995-2015. To estimate risks and observe trends of travel-related notifiable sexually transmitted and food- and water-borne infections (STIs and FWIs) among travellers, we analysed national reports of gonorrhoea, syphilis, hepatitis A, shigellosis, campylobacteriosis and salmonellosis cases and related them to travel statistics.
    
      
      Globally, approximately 2 billion people lack microbiologically safe drinking water. Boiling is the most prevalent household water treatment method, yet evidence of its health impact is limited. To conduct this systematic review, we searched four online databases with no limitations on language or publication date. Studies were eligible if health outcomes were measured for participants who reported consuming boiled and untreated water. We used reported and calculated odds ratios (ORs) and random-effects meta-analysis to estimate pathogen-specific and pooled effects by organism group and nonspecific diarrhea. Heterogeneity and publication bias were assessed using I2, meta-regression, and funnel plots; study quality was also assessed. Of the 1,998 records identified, 27 met inclusion criteria and reported extractable data. We found evidence of a significant protective effect of boiling for Vibrio cholerae infections (OR = 0.31, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.13-0.79, N = 4 studies), Blastocystis (OR = 0.35, 95% CI = 0.17-0.69, N = 3), protozoal infections overall (pooled OR = 0.61, 95% CI = 0.43-0.86, N = 11), viral infections overall (pooled OR = 0.83, 95% CI = 0.7-0.98, N = 4), and nonspecific diarrheal outcomes (OR = 0.58, 95% CI = 0.45-0.77, N = 7). We found no evidence of a protective effect for helminthic infections. Although our study was limited by the use of self-reported boiling and non-experimental designs, the evidence suggests that boiling provides measureable health benefits for pathogens whose transmission routes are primarily water based. Consequently, we believe a randomized controlled trial of boiling adherence and health outcomes is needed.
    
      
      Water-related diseases are closely linked with drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) indicators, socioeconomic status, education level, or dwelling's conditions. Developing countries exhibit a particular vulnerability to these diseases, especially rural areas and urban slums. This study assessed socioeconomic features, WASH indicators, and water-related diseases in two rural areas of the Colombian Caribbean coast. Most of this population did not finish basic education (72.3%, N = 159). Only one of the communities had a water supply (aqueduct), whereas the other received water via an adapted tanker ship. No respondents reported sewage services; 92.7% (N = 204) had garbage service. Reported cases of diarrhea were associated with low education levels (P = 2.37 × 10-9) and an unimproved drinking water supply (P = 0.035). At least one fever episode was reported in 20% (N = 44) of dwellings, but the cases were not related to any indicator. The Aedes/House index (percentage of houses that tested positive for Aedes larvae and/or pupae) was 69%, the container index (percentage of water-holding containers positive for Aedes larvae or pupae) 29.4%, and the Breteau index (number of positive containers per 100 houses in a specific location) was three positive containers per 100 inspected houses. The presence of positive containers was associated with the absence of a drinking water supply (P = 0.04). The community with poorer health indicators showed greater health vulnerability conditions for acquisition of water-related diseases. In summary, water supply and educational level were the main factors associated with the presence of water-related diseases in both communities.
    

          Background:
        
      
      An increase in notifications of cryptosporidiosis was observed in Victoria between March and April 2015. Cases mostly resided in one metropolitan region and hypothesis-generating interviews identified common exposures to aquatic facilities. We conducted a case-control study to determine exposure source(s) and facilitate control measures.
    
      
      Access to safe water is essential for public health and is one of the most important prerequisites for good living and safe food production. Many studies have shown that non-compliance with drinking water quality standards in small water supply systems is much higher than in large systems. Nevertheless, people served by small water supply systems have the right to the same level of health protection. Actions are therefore needed to improve the situation. The objective of the present study was to carry out a baseline analysis of the situation in the Nordic region and provide recommendations for governmental policy and actions. Data were gathered on number of water supplies, population served, compliance with regulations and waterborne disease outbreaks from various sources in the Nordic countries. The collected data showed that there are about 12500 regulated water supplies, 9400 of which serve fewer than 500 persons. The number of unregulated and poorly regulated supplies is unknown, but it can be roughly estimated that these serve 10% of the Nordic population on a permanent basis or 2.6 million people. However, this does not tell the whole story as many of the very small water supplies serve transient populations, summerhouse dwellers and tourist sites, with many more users. Non-compliance regarding microbes is much higher in the small supplies. The population weighted average fecal contamination incidence rate in the Nordic region is eleven times higher in the smaller supplies than in the large ones, 0.76% and 0.07%, respectively. Registered waterborne disease outbreaks were also more frequent in the small supplies than in the large ones.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Water is an important, overlooked, and controllable source of nosocomial infection. Hospitalized neonates and their mothers are particularly vulnerable to nosocomial waterborne infections. Our objectives through this systematic review were to: investigate water sources, reservoirs, and transmission routes that lead to nosocomial waterborne infections in neonates and their mothers; establish patient risk factors; compile measures for controlling outbreaks and recommended strategies for prevention; and identify information gaps to improve guidelines for reporting future outbreaks.
    
      
      Cryptosporidium is a major cause of diarrheal disease worldwide. In developing countries, this infection is endemic and in children, associated with growth faltering and cognitive function deficits, with the most severe impact on those aged <2 years. Little has been reported about symptoms and risk factors for children in industrialized countries, although the disease incidence is increasing in such regions. In November 2010, a large waterborne outbreak of C. hominis occurred in the city of Östersund in Sweden. Approximately 27,000 of the 60,000 inhabitants were symptomatic. We aimed to describe duration of symptoms and the risk factors for infection with C. hominis in children aged <15 years in a Western setting. Within 2 months after a boil water advisory, a questionnaire was sent to randomly selected inhabitants of all ages, including 753 children aged <15 years. Those with ≥3 loose stools/day were defined as cases of diarrhoea. The response rate was 70.3%, and 211 children (39.9%) fulfilled the case definition. Mean duration of diarrhoea was 7.5 days (median 6, range 1-80 days). Recurrence, defined as a new episode of diarrhoea after ≥2 days of normal stools, occurred in 52.5% of the cases. Significant risk factors for infection, besides living within the distribution area of the contaminated water plant, included a high level of water consumption, male sex, and a previous history of loose stools. The outbreak was characterized by high attack and recurrence rates, emphasizing the necessity of water surveillance to prevent future outbreaks.
    
      
      Hundreds of waterborne disease outbreaks (WBDO) of acute gastroenteritis (AGI) due to contaminated tap water are reported in developed countries each year. Such outbreaks are probably under-detected. The aim of our study was to develop an integrated approach to detect and study clusters of AGI in geographical areas with homogeneous exposure to drinking water. Data for the number of AGI cases are available at the municipality level while exposure to tap water depends on drinking water networks (DWN). These two geographical units do not systematically overlap. This study proposed to develop an algorithm which would match the most relevant grouping of municipalities with a specific DWN, in order that tap water exposure can be taken into account when investigating future disease outbreaks. A space-time detection method was applied to the grouping of municipalities. Seven hundred and fourteen new geographical areas (groupings of municipalities) were obtained compared with the 1,310 municipalities and the 1,706 DWN. Eleven potential WBDO were identified in these groupings of municipalities. For ten of them, additional environmental investigations identified at least one event that could have caused microbiological contamination of DWN in the days previous to the occurrence of a reported WBDO.
    
      
      AbstractUniversal access to safe drinking water is a global priority. To estimate the annual disease burden of campylobacteriosis, nontyphoidal salmonellosis, cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, and norovirus attributable to waterborne transmission in Australia, we multiplied regional World Health Organization (WHO) estimates of the proportion of cases attributable to waterborne transmission by estimates of all-source disease burden for each study pathogen. Norovirus was attributed as causing the most waterborne disease cases (479,632; 95% uncertainty interval [UI]: 0-1,111,874) followed by giardiasis and campylobacteriosis. The estimated waterborne disability-adjusted life year (DALY) burden for campylobacteriosis (2,004; 95% UI: 0-5,831) was 7-fold greater than other study pathogens and exceeded the WHO guidelines for drinking water quality (1 × 10-6 DALY per person per year) by 90-fold. However, these estimates include disease transmitted via either drinking or recreational water exposure. More precise country-specific and drinking water-specific attribution estimates would better define the health burden from drinking water and inform changes to treatment requirements.
    
      
      The objective of the present study was to assess the occurrence of major waterborne enteric viruses (enterovirus, norovirus, adenovirus, rotavirus, hepatitis A and E virus) along the Tiber River in Italy, in areas affected by different kinds of anthropogenic pressure (agricultural, urban, industrial and pristine). Moreover, in light of the recent abundant detection of human bocavirus in urban wastewater samples in Italy, the occurrence of this virus was also assessed. Virus detection was based on nested PCR followed by sequencing, and on real-time PCR. A correlation with anthropogenic pressure was observed. The urban and industrial areas were the most contaminated (100 and 75% of samples were positive for at least one virus respectively). The agricultural area was less contaminated, with 50% of samples positive. None of the samples collected in a pristine area were positive for viruses. The most frequently detected virus was human bocavirus, identified in 37·5% of samples, followed by norovirus and enterovirus (28% each) and adenovirus (21·6%). Rotavirus, and hepatitis A and E viruses were less common (<9%). Although Human Bocavirus is not considered a waterborne pathogen, the widespread contamination of river waters suggests that virus transmission via the water route should not be neglected.
    
      
      Illness after recreational water activities can be caused by a variety of agents, including bacteria, viruses, parasites, algae, and even chlorine gas. These illnesses are more common in summer. Waterborne illnesses are underreported because most recreational activity occurs in unsupervised venues or on private property, and participants tend to disperse before illness occurs. Symptoms of waterborne illness are primarily gastrointestinal, but upper respiratory and skin manifestations also occur. Gastrointestinal symptoms are usually self-limited, and supportive treatment may be all that is necessary. However, some infections can cause significant morbidity and mortality. Cryptosporidium and Giardia intestinalis are the most common cause of gastrointestinal illness and have partial chlorine resistance. Respiratory infections are typically mild and self-limited. However, if legionnaires' disease develops and is unrecognized, mortality may be as high as 10%. Cellulitis caused by Vibrio vulnificus can result in serious illness, amputation, and death. Early and appropriate antibiotic treatment is important. Chronically ill and immunocompromised persons are at high risk of infection and should be counseled accordingly.
    
      
      Diseases spread by water are caused by fecal-oral, contact, inhalation, or other routes, resulting in illnesses affecting multiple body systems. We selected 13 pathogens or syndromes implicated in waterborne disease outbreaks or other well-documented waterborne transmission (acute otitis externa, Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium, Escherichia coli (E. coli), free-living ameba, Giardia, Hepatitis A virus, Legionella (Legionnaires' disease), nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), Pseudomonas-related pneumonia or septicemia, Salmonella, Shigella, and Vibrio). We documented annual numbers of deaths in the United States associated with these infections using a combination of death certificate data, nationally representative hospital discharge data, and disease-specific surveillance systems (2003-2009). We documented 6,939 annual total deaths associated with the 13 infections; of these, 493 (7%) were caused by seven pathogens transmitted by the fecal-oral route. A total of 6,301 deaths (91%) were associated with infections from Pseudomonas, NTM, and Legionella, environmental pathogens that grow in water system biofilms. Biofilm-associated pathogens can cause illness following inhalation of aerosols or contact with contaminated water. These findings suggest that most mortality from these 13 selected infections in the United States does not result from classical fecal-oral transmission but rather from other transmission routes.
    
      
      Diarrhoea is a major cause of childhood morbidity and mortality globally. While the childhood diarrhoea and its association with child feeding, and hygiene, hand washing and water treatment are studied elsewhere, the association of water handling and child feeding with childhood diarrhoea is an understudied area in Nepal. This study aimed to investigate the association of water handling and child feeding practice with childhood diarrhoea among children of one to five years of age in Southern, Nepal. A cross-sectional study was conducted in the Dhanusha district of Southern Nepal in 2013. A total of 284 mother-child pairs were selected using systemic random sampling. A four-week prevalence of childhood diarrhoea was reported using frequency distribution. The association of childhood diarrhoea with water handling and child feeding practices was ascertained using multiple logistic regressions after adjusting for potential confounders. The result of the study demonstrated that the four-week prevalence of childhood diarrhoea was 36.6%. Our finding showed that unsafe water handling practices were associated independently with childhood diarrhoea: untreated water (aOR 3.55; 95% CI: 1.13-11.10), uncovered water (aOR 2.14; 95% CI: 1.09-4.19). Similarly, partial breast feeding (aOR 4.35; 95% CI: 1.87-10.12) was also associated with higher odds of childhood diarrhoea. One third of children in Southern Nepal still had diarrhoea within the four weeks preceding the survey. As poor water handling and sub optimal infant feeding practice were major risk factors contributing to such a high burden of the disease, health promotion strategies such as promotion of safe water handling, improved hygiene and child feeding practices are recommended for the prevention of childhood diarrhoea in Southern Terai of Nepal.
    
      
      Hydroclimatological and anthropogenic factors are key drivers of waterborne disease transmission. Information on human settlements and host mobility on waterways along which pathogens and hosts disperse, and relevant hydroclimatological processes, can be acquired remotely and included in spatially explicit mathematical models of disease transmission. In the case of epidemic cholera, such models allowed the description of complex disease patterns and provided insight into the course of ongoing epidemics. The inclusion of spatial information in models of disease transmission can aid in emergency management and the assessment of alternative interventions. Here, we review the study of drivers of transmission via spatially explicit approaches and argue that, because many parasitic waterborne diseases share the same drivers as cholera, similar principles may apply.
    

          Objective:
        
      
      To analyze the relationship of sewerage coverage and wastewater treatment with waterborne disease behaviour.
    
      
      The Far North region in Cameroon has been more heavily impacted by cholera than any other region over the past decade, but very little has been done to study the drivers of waterborne diseases in the region. We investigated the relationship between water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) parameters, microbial and antibiotic resistance (AR) contamination levels in drinking water, and health outcomes using health survey and molecular analysis during June and July of 2014 in two settlement types (agro-pastoralist villages and transhumant pastoralist camps). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to determine fecal contamination sources, enteric pathogens, and antibiotic resistance genes. Ruminant-associated fecal contamination was widespread in both settlement types (81.2%), with human-associated contamination detected in 21.7% of the samples. Salmonella spp. (59.4%) and Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (stx1 44.9% and stx2 31.9%) were detected across all samples. Tetracycline resistance was found only in village samples. A significant difference in diarrheal incidence within the past 28 days among young children was found between camps (31.3%) and villages (0.0%). Our findings suggest that water contamination may play an important role in contributing to gastrointestinal illness, supporting the need for future research and public health intervention to reduce gastrointestinal illness in the area.
    
      
      Drinking water management in Canada is complex, with a decentralized, three-tiered governance structure responsible for safe drinking water throughout the country. The current approach has been described as fragmented, leading to governance gaps, duplication of efforts, and an absence of accountability and enforcement. Although there have been no major waterborne disease outbreaks in Canada since 2001, a lack of performance improvement, especially in small drinking water systems, is evident. The World Health Organization water safety plan approach for drinking water management represents an alternative preventative management framework to the current conventional, reactive drinking water management strategies. This approach has seen successful implementation throughout the world and has the potential to address many of the issues with drinking water management in Canada. This paper presents a review and strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats analysis of drinking water management and governance in Canada at the federal, provincial/territorial, and municipal levels. Based on this analysis, a modified water safety plan (defined as the plan-do-check-act (PDCA)-WSP framework) is proposed, established from water safety plan recommendations and the principles of PDCA for continuous performance improvement. This proposed framework is designed to strengthen current drinking water management in Canada and is designed to fit within and incorporate the existing governance structure.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Climate change could increase the number of regions affected by meteorologic disasters. Meteorologic disasters can increase the risk of infectious disease outbreaks, including waterborne and foodborne diseases. Although many outbreaks of waterborne diseases after single disasters have been analyzed, there have not been sufficient studies reporting comprehensive analyses of cases occurring during long-term surveillance after multiple disasters, which could provide evidence of whether meteorologic disasters cause infectious disease outbreaks.
    
      
      Wastewater management in Canadian Arctic communities is influenced by several geographical factors including climate, remoteness, population size, and local food-harvesting practices. Most communities use trucked collection services and basic treatment systems, which are capable of only low-level pathogen removal. These systems are typically reliant solely on natural environmental processes for treatment and make use of existing lagoons, wetlands, and bays. They are operated in a manner such that partially treated wastewater still containing potentially hazardous microorganisms is released into the terrestrial and aquatic environment at random times. Northern communities rely heavily on their local surroundings as a source of food, drinking water, and recreation, thus creating the possibility of human exposure to wastewater effluent. Human exposure to microbial hazards present in municipal wastewater can lead to acute gastrointestinal illness or more severe disease. Although estimating the actual disease burdens associated with wastewater exposures in Arctic communities is challenging, waterborne- and sanitation-related illness is believed to be comparatively higher than in other parts of Canada. This review offers a conceptual framework and evaluation of current knowledge to enable the first microbial risk assessment of exposure scenarios associated with food-harvesting and recreational activities in Arctic communities, where simplified wastewater systems are being operated.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Extensive backflow of treated wastewater caused household water contamination in a Finnish town in 2007. The drinking water of 9 500 residents became heavily polluted with faecal microbes, resulting in a large gastroenteritis epidemic. Cases of reactive arthritis, milder joint symptoms and prolonged gastrointestinal symptoms were observed after the outbreak. A follow-up survey was performed to study less familiar long-term health consequences within a year from the outbreak.
    
      
      Plants are important in urban environments for removing pathogens and improving water quality. Seagrass meadows are the most widespread coastal ecosystem on the planet. Although these plants are known to be associated with natural biocide production, they have not been evaluated for their ability to remove microbiological contamination. Using amplicon sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, we found that when seagrass meadows are present, there was a 50% reduction in the relative abundance of potential bacterial pathogens capable of causing disease in humans and marine organisms. Moreover, field surveys of more than 8000 reef-building corals located adjacent to seagrass meadows showed twofold reductions in disease levels compared to corals at paired sites without adjacent seagrass meadows. These results highlight the importance of seagrass ecosystems to the health of humans and other organisms.
    
      
      The Flint Water Crisis-due to changes of water source and treatment procedures-has revealed many unsolved social, environmental, and public health problems for US drinking water, including opportunistic premise plumbing pathogens (OPPP). The true health impact of OPPP, especially in vulnerable populations such as the elderly, is largely unknown. We explored 108 claims in the largest US national uniformly collected data repository to determine rates and costs of OPPP-related hospitalizations. In 1991-2006, 617,291 cases of three selected OPPP infections resulted in the elderly alone of $0.6 billion USD per year of payments. Antibiotic resistance significantly increased OPPP illness costs that are likely to be underreported. More precise estimates for OPPP burdens could be obtained if better clinical, microbiological, administrative, and environmental monitoring data were cross-linked. An urgent dialog across governmental and disciplinary divides, and studies on preventing OPPP through drinking water exposure, are warranted.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Toxoplasma gondii is a zoonotic coccidian parasite causing morbidity and mortality. In Yemen, T. gondii infection has been reported among pregnant women seeking healthcare in the main cities. However, no data are available on the prevalence of T. gondii infection and its associated risk factors among pregnant women in the rural communities of the country. Thus, the present study aimed to determine the seroprevalence of T. gondii and identify its risk factors among pregnant women in the rural communities of Taiz governorate, Yemen.
    
      
      The present work compiles a review on drinking waterborne outbreaks, with the perspective of production and distribution of microbiologically safe water, during 2000-2014. The outbreaks are categorised in raw water contamination, treatment deficiencies and distribution network failure. The main causes for contamination were: for groundwater, intrusion of animal faeces or wastewater due to heavy rain; in surface water, discharge of wastewater into the water source and increased turbidity and colour; at treatment plants, malfunctioning of the disinfection equipment; and for distribution systems, cross-connections, pipe breaks and wastewater intrusion into the network. Pathogens causing the largest number of affected consumers were Cryptosporidium, norovirus, Giardia, Campylobacter, and rotavirus. The largest number of different pathogens was found for the treatment works and the distribution network. The largest number of affected consumers with gastrointestinal illness was for contamination events from a surface water source, while the largest number of individual events occurred for the distribution network.
    
      
      Healthcare-acquired infections are an increasing problem for health care providers and policy makers. Water is an overlooked source of infectious microorganisms in health care facilities. Waterborne nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are ubiquitous, and particularly problematic in health care facility water systems, and cause a variety of diseases. The purpose of this review is to assess health care associated NTM infections from health care facility water systems. We documented susceptible populations, modes of transmission, and the median attack rate (e.g. patients infected per patients exposed). We aimed to identify transmission risk factors and inform evidence-based policies for infection control and prevention. We searched Embase, PubMed, Web of Science and clinicaltrials.gov without date restrictions. English language articles with original data on NTM waterborne infections in health care settings were included. Randomized controlled trials, descriptive studies (case reports, case series), case-control studies, cohort studies, cross-sectional surveys, and quasi-experimental studies on nosocomial waterborne infections were included. Three investigators independently screened titles and abstracts for relevant articles, and one screened full-text articles. Data were extracted by one investigator, and a second confirmed accuracy for 10% of results. We included 22 observational studies. Immunocompromised, post-surgical, and hemodialysis patients were commonly affected populations. A range of exposure routes such as uncovered central venous catheters (CVCs), wound exposure, and contamination during surgical procedures was reported. The median attack rate was 12.1% (interquartile range, 11-27.2). Waterborne NTM infection affects susceptible patients through common, preventable exposure routes. Effective prevention strategies will require both medical and environmental health expertise, and inter-professional cooperation will optimize these efforts.
    
      
      We conducted a matched case-control study to examine the association between heavy precipitation events and waterborne outbreaks (WBOs) by linking epidemiological registries and meteorological data between 1992 and 2012 in four Nordic countries. Heavy precipitation events were defined by above average (exceedance) daily rainfall during the preceding weeks using local references. We performed conditional logistic regression using the four previous years as the controls. Among WBOs with known onset date (n = 89), exceedance rainfall on two or more days was associated with occurrence of outbreak, OR = 3.06 (95% CI 1.38-6.78), compared to zero exceedance days. Stratified analyses revealed a significant association with single household water supplies, ground water as source and for outbreaks occurring during spring and summer. These findings were reproduced in analyses including all WBOs with known outbreak month (n = 186). The vulnerability of single households to WBOs associated with heavy precipitation events should be communicated to homeowners and implemented into future policy planning to reduce the risk of waterborne illness.
    
      
      The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is an example of a country that suffers from high water scarcity. Additionally, due to the economic drivers in the country, such as phosphate and potash extraction and pharmaceutical production, the little fresh water that remains is generally polluted. The infrastructure, often antiquated in urban areas and non-existent in rural areas, also contributes to poor water conditions and to the spread of waterborne diseases. This paper examines the socioeconomic factors that contribute to diarrhea and hepatitis A on a macro level in Jordan and discusses the public-policies that government officials could use to abate those problems. Ordinary least squares time series models are used to understand the macro-level variables that impact the incidence of these diseases in Jordan. Public health expenditure has a significant impact on reducing their incidence. Furthermore, investment in sanitation facilities in rural regions is likely to reduce the number of cases of hepatitis A. Perhaps the most surprising outcome is that importation of goods and services likely results in a decrease in cases of hepatitis A. However, income has little impact on the incidence of diarrhea and hepatitis A.
    
      
      Female genital schistosomiasis is a neglected tropical disease caused by Schistosoma haematobium. Infected females may suffer from symptoms mimicking sexually transmitted infections. We explored if self-reported history of unsafe water contact could be used as a simple predictor of genital schistosomiasis. In a cross-sectional study in rural South Africa, 883 sexually active women aged 16-22 years were included. Questions were asked about urogenital symptoms and water contact history. Urine samples were tested for S. haematobium ova. A score based on self-reported water contact was calculated and the association with symptoms was explored while adjusting for other genital infections using multivariable logistic regression analyses. S. haematobium ova were detected in the urine of 30.5% of subjects. Having ova in the urine was associated with the water contact score (p < 0.001). Symptoms that were associated with water contact included burning sensation in the genitals (p = 0.005), spot bleeding (p = 0.012), abnormal discharge smell (p = 0.018), bloody discharge (p = 0.020), genital ulcer (p = 0.038), red urine (p < 0.001), stress incontinence (p = 0.001) and lower abdominal pain (p = 0.028). In S. haematobium endemic areas, self-reported water contact was strongly associated with urogenital symptoms. In low-resource settings, a simple history including risk of water contact behaviour can serve as an indicator of urogenital schistosomiasis.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) virus has been of public health concern since 2003. Probable risk factors for A(H5N1) transmission to human have been demonstrated in several studies or epidemiological reports. However, transmission patterns may differ according to demographic characteristics of the population and local practices. This article aggregates these data from three studies with data collected in the previous surveys in 2006 and 2007 to further examine the risks factors associated with presence of anti-A(H5) antibodies among villagers residing within outbreak areas.
    

          Objectives:
        
      
      Escherichia coli is the standard water quality indicator for diarrhoea risk. Yet, the association between E. coli and diarrhoea is inconsistent across studies without a systematic assessment of methodological differences behind this variation. Most studies measure water quality cross-sectionally with diarrhoea, risking exposure misclassification and reverse causation. Studies use different recall windows for self-reported diarrhoea; longer periods increase potential outcome misclassification through misrecall. Control of confounding is inconsistent across studies. Additionally, diarrhoea measured in unblinded intervention trials can present courtesy bias. We utilised measurements from a randomised trial of water interventions in Bangladesh to assess how these factors affect the E. coli-diarrhoea association.
    
      
      CDC collects data on foodborne and waterborne disease outbreaks reported by all U.S. states and territories through the Foodborne Disease Outbreak Surveillance System (FDOSS) (http://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/fdoss/surveillance/index.html) and the Waterborne Disease and Outbreak Surveillance System (WBDOSS) http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/surveillance), respectively. These two systems are the primary source of national data describing the number of reported outbreaks; outbreak-associated illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths; etiologic agents; water source or implicated foods; settings of exposure; and other factors associated with recognized foodborne and waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Communities living in developing countries as well as populations affected by natural or man-made disasters can be left at great risk from water related diseases, especially those spread through the faecal-oral route. Conventional water treatments such as boiling and chlorination can be effective but may prove costly for impoverished communities. Solar water disinfection (SODIS) has been shown to be a cheap and effective way for communities to treat their water. The exposure to sunlight is typically carried out in small volume plastic beverage bottles (up to 2 l). Given the water requirements of consumption and basic personal hygiene, this may not always meet the needs of communities. Recent work has shown 19-L plastic water dispenser containers to be effective SODIS reactors, comparable in efficacy to PET bottles. In this paper we outline the need for studying SODIS in large volumes and discuss 4 main associated challenges.
    
      
      The DRIP-SWICCH (Developing Research and Innovative Policies Specific to the Water-related Impacts of Climate Change on Health) project aimed to increase the resilience of Cambodian communities to the health risks posed by climate change-related impacts on water. This article follows a review of climate change and water-related diseases in Cambodia and presents the results of a time series analysis of monthly weather and diarrheal disease data for 11 provinces. In addition, correlations of diarrheal disease incidence with selected demographic, socioeconomic, and water and sanitation indicators are described, with results suggesting education and literacy may be most protective against disease. The potential impact of climate change on the burden of diarrheal disease in Cambodia is considered, along with the implications of these findings for health systems adaptation.
    
      
      Waterborne infection is an important cause of morbidity and mortality throughout the world. Personal hydration packs have been used by military personnel since the Gulf War and are now a common issue item. Since military personnel tend to operate under austere conditions and may use a variety of water sources, preventing the acquisition of waterborne infections is extremely important. Further, since hydration pack water reservoir replacements may not be available during combat operations, the development of a reliable cleaning protocol for use in the field is essential. Several methods for cleaning have been described. In the current study, three common cleaning methodologies-bleach treatment, baking soda treatment, and proprietary CAMELBAK Cleaning Tabs™-were evaluated for the ability to remove Escherichia coli contamination from hydration pack water reservoirs. The study results suggest that the use of bleach and proprietary CAMELBAK tablets should be encouraged since they both operate by releasing bactericidal chlorine compounds into solution, which is more effective at reducing post-treatment bacterial burden. It should be noted that no method was 100% effective at completely eliminating bacteria from the reservoirs and that mechanical cleaning was not attempted.
    
      
      The wide circulation of Klebsiella bacteria in water ofwater objects of different climatic zones of Russia and various function is established. So bacteria of the Klebsiella strain are in superficial sources of the centralized water supply depending on extent of their biological and chemical pollution; underground waters at the unprotected water-bearing horizons; in drinking water at insufficiently effective system of its cleaning and disinfecting. Klebsiella circulating in water was shown to keep properties of pathogenicity and a virulence, possess resistance both to modern preparations and disinfecting agents (chlorine, an ultraviolet to radiation). Bacteria of the Klebsiella strain have high penetration in the water-bearing horizons. At strains of Klebsiella there is allocated considerable pathogenic potential (adhesive, invasive, phosphatase, lecithinase, DNA-ase, hemolytic activity) and genetic markers of pathogenicity of cnf-1. The etiologic role of bacteria of Klebsiella and an infecting (100, COE/dm3) dose emergence of acute intestinal infections (AII) is established. Detection of Klebsiella in water objects and especially in water of drinking appointment, in the absence of total coliform bacteria (TCB) contributes to the epidemic danger of water use.
    
      
      Waterborne diseases have emerged as global health problems and their rapid and sensitive detection in environmental water samples is of great importance. Bacterial identification and enumeration in water samples is significant as it helps to maintain safe drinking water for public consumption. Culture-based methods are laborious, time-consuming, and yield false-positive results, whereas viable but nonculturable (VBNCs) microorganisms cannot be recovered. Hence, numerous methods have been developed for rapid detection and quantification of waterborne pathogenic bacteria in water. These rapid methods can be classified into nucleic acid-based, immunology-based, and biosensor-based detection methods. This review summarizes the principle and current state of rapid methods for the monitoring and detection of waterborne bacterial pathogens. Rapid methods outlined are polymerase chain reaction (PCR), digital droplet PCR, real-time PCR, multiplex PCR, DNA microarray, Next-generation sequencing (pyrosequencing, Illumina technology and genomics), and fluorescence in situ hybridization that are categorized as nucleic acid-based methods. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunofluorescence are classified into immunology-based methods. Optical, electrochemical, and mass-based biosensors are grouped into biosensor-based methods. Overall, these methods are sensitive, specific, time-effective, and important in prevention and diagnosis of waterborne bacterial diseases.
    

          Purpose of review:
        
      
      This review discusses the utility of pathogen-specific antibody biomarkers for improving estimates of the population burden of waterborne infections, assessing the fraction of infections that can be prevented by specific water treatments, and understanding transmission routes and the natural history and ecology of disease in different populations (including asymptomatic infection rates).
    

          Objective:
        
      
      We aimed to evaluate residence in evacuation areas (storm areas) as a risk factor for food and waterborne disease (FWBD) associated with Hurricane Sandy flooding.
    
      
      Small intestinal infections are extremely common worldwide. They may be bacterial, viral, or parasitic in etiology. Most are foodborne or waterborne, with specific etiologies differing by region and with diverse pathophysiologies. Very young, very old, and immune-deficient individuals are the most vulnerable to morbidity or mortality from small intestinal infections. There have been significant advances in diagnostic sophistication with the development and early application of molecular diagnostic assays, though these tests have not become mainstream. The lack of rapid diagnoses combined with the self-limited nature of small intestinal infections has hampered the development of specific and effective treatments other than oral rehydration. Antibiotics are not indicated in the absence of an etiologic diagnosis, and not at all in the case of some infections. 
    
      
      Diseases are rapidly urbanizing. Ageing infrastructures, high levels of inequality, poor urban governance, rapidly growing economies and highly dense and mobile populations all create environments rife for water-borne diseases. This article analyzes the role of institutions as crosscutting entities among a myriad of factors that breed water-borne diseases in the city of Ahmedabad, India. It applies 'path dependency' and a 'rational choice' perspective to understand the factors facilitating the breeding of diseases. This study is based on household surveys of approximately 327 households in two case study wards and intermittent interviews with key informants over a period of 2 years. Principle component analysis is applied to reduce the data and convert a set of observations, which potentially correlate with each other, into components. Institutional analyses behind these components reveal the role of social actors in exploiting the deeply rooted inefficiencies affecting urban health. This has led to a vicious cycle; breaking this cycle requires understanding the political dynamics that underlie the exposure and prevalence of diseases to improve urban health. 
    
      
      This study aimed to investigate and classify the occurrence of waterborne diseases in Florianópolis city, Santa Catarina State, Southern Brazil and to correlate these diseases with the following social-environmental indicators of the local population: type of water supply, adequate collection and sewage treatment, areas of flooding and domestic water tank cleaning. Reports of outpatients were analyzed for surveillance of waterborne diseases during the period of 2002 to 2009. Waterborne diseases were classified into four groups: Group A: diarrheal diseases; Group B: parasitological diseases; Group C: skin diseases and Group D: eye diseases. The diarrheal, parasitological and skin diseases were the most frequently reported. Waterborne diseases belonging to Group A in all sites were correlated with other waterborne diseases groups, which can be an indicator of the circulation of other waterborne diseases. Regarding the social-environmental indicators assessed, the most correlated with waterborne diseases were the origin and quality of the water supply, followed by inadequate collection and treatment of sewage, frequent flooding, and finally the lack of cleanliness of the water reservoir. The results highlight the need for policies aiming for improvement of the sanitation service in the maintenance of human, animal and environmental health. 
    
      
      This pilot study was conducted to assess the utility of using a health insurance database for the automated detection of waterborne outbreaks of acute gastroenteritis (AGE). The weekly number of AGE cases for which the patient consulted a doctor (cAGE) was derived from this database for 1,543 towns in three French districts during the 2009-2012 period. The method we used is based on a spatial comparison of incidence rates and of their time trends between the target town and the district. Each municipality was tested, week by week, for the entire study period. Overall, 193 clusters were identified, 10% of the municipalities were involved in at least one cluster and less than 2% in several. We can infer that nationwide more than 1,000 clusters involving 30,000 cases of cAGE each year may be linked to tap water. The clusters discovered with this automated detection system will be reported to local operators for investigation of the situations at highest risk. This method will be compared with others before automated detection is implemented on a national level. 
    
      
      The aim of this study was to investigate the beneficial effects of zinc (Zn) in preventing lead (Pb)-induced reproductive toxicity in Wistar rats. The rats were divided into four groups, namely, control group, Pb group, Zn group, and Pb + Zn group. Animals were exposed to Pb (819 mg of Pb/L) or Zn (71 mg of Zn/L) or both through drinking water for 65 days. Rats exposed to Pb showed decreased weights of testes and accessory sex organs. Significant decrease in the testicular daily sperm production, epididymal sperm count, motility, viability, and number of hypoosmotic tail coiled sperm was observed in Pb-exposed rats. Testicular 3β- and 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity levels and circulatory testosterone levels were also decreased significantly in Pb-exposed rats. A significant increase in the lipid peroxidation products with a significant decrease in the activities of catalase and superoxide dismutase were observed in the testes and epididymis of Pb-exposed rats. Moreover, the testicular architecture showed lumens devoid of sperm in Pb-exposed rats. Supplementation of Zn mitigated Pb-induced oxidative stress and restored the spermatogenesis and steroidogenesis in Pb-exposed rats. In conclusion, cotreatment of Zn is effective for recovering suppressed spermatogenesis, steroidogenesis, elevated oxidative status, and histological damage in the testis of rats treated with Pb.
    

          Background:
        
      
      We describe the status of waterborne outbreaks notified in Norway and discuss this in the context of outbreaks recorded in previous years, to gain a better understanding of their development in Norway in recent years.
    
      
      Toxoplasma gondii transmission via breastfeeding has been discussed; however, no cases have been confirmed to date. This article describes a case of acute toxoplasmosis diagnosed in a mother and her six-month-old breastfed infant. The study accounts for the possibility of breast milk transmission and directs both clinicians and pediatricians to the hypothesis that both patients acquired toxoplasmosis via water ingestion. 
    
      
      Norovirus infections in diarrhea patients attending an urban and a rural hospital in Bangladesh were investigated. A total of 953 fecal specimens from both children and adults collected during 2010-2014 were tested for the presence of norovirus using real time PCR. One fourth (25%) of the specimens were positive for norovirus RNA which was identified both in children and adults. Norovirus was associated with short duration of diarrhea, high abdominal pain, and more moderate to severe dehydration when compared with rotavirus infections. Norovirus GII (69%) was the most prevalent genogroup followed by GI (18%), mixed GI/GII/GIV (11%), and GIV (2%). Among GII genogroup, GII.4 (42%) was the most prevalent genotype followed by GII.3 (21%), GII.6 (7%), GII.7 (6%), and GII.21 (6%). GII.4 and GII.3 strains were frequently identified (82% and 75%, respectively) in children <2 years of age and less commonly (16% and 15%) in adults more than 18 years of age. The present study reinforces the importance of norovirus-associated hospitalizations both in children and adults. The dynamic molecular epidemiology of norovirus requires routine strain surveillance to identify changes in prevailing strains. J. Med. Virol. 88:1742-1750, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
    
      
      Waterborne bacterial pathogens in wastewater remains an important public health concern, not only because of the environmental damage, morbidity and mortality that they cause, but also due to the high cost of disinfecting wastewater by using physical and chemical methods in treatment plants. Bacteriophages are proposed as bacterial pathogen indicators and as an alternative biological method for wastewater treatment. Phage biocontrol in large scale treatment requires adaptive and aggressive phages that are able to overcome the environmental forces that interfere with phage-host interactions while targeting unwanted bacterial pathogens and preventing biofilms and foaming. This review will shed light on aspects of using bacteriophage programming technology in wastewater plants to rapidly target and reduce undesirable bacteria without harming the useful bacteria needed for biodegradation. 
    
      
      Hospital water may serve as a reservoir of healthcare-associated pathogens, and contaminated water can lead to outbreaks and severe infections. The clinical features of waterborne outbreaks and infections as well as prevention strategies and control measures are reviewed. The common waterborne pathogens were bacteria, including Legionella and other gram-negative bacteria, and nontuberculous mycobacteria, although fungi and viruses were occasionally described. These pathogens caused a variety of infections, including bacteremia and invasive and disseminated diseases, particularly among immunocompromised hosts and critically ill adults as well as neonates. Waterborne outbreaks occurred in healthcare settings with emergence of new reported reservoirs, including electronic faucets (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Legionella), decorative water wall fountains (Legionella), and heater-cooler devices used in cardiac surgery (Mycobacterium chimaera). Advanced molecular techniques are useful for achieving a better understanding of reservoirs and transmission pathways of waterborne pathogens. Developing prevention strategies based on water reservoirs provides a practical approach for healthcare personnel.
    
      
      Wilderness medicine encompasses prevention and treatment of illness and injury, education and training, emergency medical services, and search and rescue in the wilderness. Although traumatic injuries, including minor injuries, outnumber medical illness as the cause of morbidity in the wilderness, basic understanding of the prevention and management of injury and illness, including recognition, identification, treatment, initial management, and stabilization, is essential, in addition to the ability to facilitate evacuation of affected patients. An important theme throughout wilderness medicine is planning and preparation for the best- and worst-case scenarios, and being ready for the unexpected. 
    
      
      Traveler's diarrhea (TD) is the most common travel-related illness, and it can have a significant impact on the traveler. Pretravel consultation provides an excellent opportunity for the clinician to counsel the traveler and discuss strategies such as food and water hygiene, vaccinations, and medications for prophylaxis or self-treatment that may decrease the incidence and impact of TD. Postinfectious sequelae, such as postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome, reactive arthritis, and Guillain-Barre syndrome, may develop weeks or months after return. 
    
      
      Pretravel care for the health care provider begins with an inventory, including the destination, length of stay, logistical arrangements, type of lodging, food and water supply, team members, personal medical needs, and the needs of the community to be treated. This inventory should be created and processed well in advance of the planned medical excursion. The key thing to remember in one's planning is to be a health care provider during one's global health care travel and not to become a patient oneself. This article will help demonstrate the medical requirements and recommendations for such planning. 
    
      
      Within the United States, elevated levels of fecal indicator bacteria (FIB) remain the leading cause of surface water-quality impairments requiring formal remediation plans under the federal Clean Water Act's Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) program. The sufficiency of compliance with numerical FIB criteria as the targeted endpoint of TMDL remediation plans may be questionable given poor correlations between FIB and pathogenic microorganisms and varying degrees of risk associated with exposure to different fecal pollution sources (e.g. human vs animal). The present study linked a watershed-scale FIB fate and transport model with a dose-response model to continuously predict human health risks via quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA), for comparison to regulatory benchmarks. This process permitted comparison of risks associated with different fecal pollution sources in an impaired urban watershed in order to identify remediation priorities. Results indicate that total human illness risks were consistently higher than the regulatory benchmark of 36 illnesses/1000 people for the study watershed, even when the predicted FIB levels were in compliance with the Escherichia coli geometric mean standard of 126CFU/100mL. Sanitary sewer overflows were associated with the greatest risk of illness. This is of particular concern, given increasing indications that sewer leakage is ubiquitous in urban areas, yet not typically fully accounted for during TMDL development. Uncertainty analysis suggested the accuracy of risk estimates would be improved by more detailed knowledge of site-specific pathogen presence and densities. While previous applications of the QMRA process to impaired waterways have mostly focused on single storm events or hypothetical situations, the continuous modeling framework presented in this study could be integrated into long-term water quality management planning, especially the United States' TMDL program, providing greater clarity to watershed stakeholders and decision-makers. 
    
      
      The aim of this article is to introduce the methodology of disease burden (DB) to quantify the health impact of microbial regrowth during wastewater reuse, using the case study of a decentralized water reuse system in Xi'an Si-yuan University, located in Xi'an, China. Based on field investigation findings, Escherichia coli (E. coli), Salmonella and rotavirus were selected as typical regrowth pathogens causing potential health hazards during the reuse of reclaimed water. Subsequently, major exposure routes including sprinkler irrigation, landscape fountains and toilet flushing were identified. Mathematical models were established to build the relationship between exposure dose and disease burden by calculating the disability adjusted life year (DALY). Results of disease burden for this case study show that DALYs attributed to E. coli were significantly greater than those caused by other pathogens, and DALYs associated with sprinkler irrigation were higher than those originating from other routes. A correlation between exposure dose and disease was obtained by introducing a modified calculation of morbidity, which can extend the assessment endpoint of health risk to disease burden from the conventional infection rate. 
    
      
      This study systemically analyzed data on the prevalence of foodborne pathogens and foodborne disease outbreaks to identify the priorities of foodborne infection risk management in Korea. Multiple correspondence analysis was applied to three variables: origin of food source, phase of food supply chain, and 12 pathogens using 358 cases from 76 original papers and official reports published in 1998-2012. In addition, correspondence analysis of two variables--place and pathogen--was conducted based on epidemiological data of 2357 foodborne outbreaks in 2002-2011 provided by the Korean Ministry of Food and Drug Safety. The results of this study revealed three distinct areas of food monitoring: (1) livestock-derived raw food contaminated with Campylobacter spp., pathogenic Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., and Listeria monocytogenes; (2) multi-ingredient and ready-to-eat food related to Staphylococcus aureus; and (3) water associated with norovirus. Our findings emphasize the need to track the sources and contamination pathways of foodborne pathogens for more effective risk management.
    

          Objective:
        
      
      Enteric illness represents a significant burden of illness in Canada and internationally. Building on previous research, an expert elicitation was undertaken to explore the routes of transmission for 28 pathogens involved in enteric illness in Canada. This article considers the subcategories of foodborne, waterborne, and animal contact transmission.
    
      
      This study analyses the relationship between meteorological phenomena and outbreaks of waterborne-transmitted vero cytotoxin-producing Escherichia coli (VTEC) in the Republic of Ireland over an 8-year period (2005-2012). Data pertaining to the notification of waterborne VTEC outbreaks were extracted from the Computerised Infectious Disease Reporting system, which is administered through the national Health Protection Surveillance Centre as part of the Health Service Executive. Rainfall and temperature data were obtained from the national meteorological office and categorised as cumulative rainfall, heavy rainfall events in the previous 7 days, and mean temperature. Regression analysis was performed using logistic regression (LR) analysis. The LR model was significant (p < 0.001), with all independent variables: cumulative rainfall, heavy rainfall and mean temperature making a statistically significant contribution to the model. The study has found that rainfall, particularly heavy rainfall in the preceding 7 days of an outbreak, is a strong statistical indicator of a waterborne outbreak and that temperature also impacts waterborne VTEC outbreak occurrence. 
    

          Background:
        
      
      Some rural African communities residing along rivers use the untreated river water for domestic purposes, making them vulnerable to waterborne diseases such as diarrhea.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Community water supplies in underserved areas of the United States may be associated with increased microbiological contamination and risk of gastrointestinal disease. Microbial and health risks affecting such systems have not been systematically characterized outside outbreak investigations. The objective of the study was to evaluate associations between self-reported gastrointestinal illnesses (GII) and household-level water supply characteristics.
    
      
      Waterborne parasites that infect both humans and animals are common causes of diarrhoeal illness, but the relative importance of transmission between humans and animals and vice versa remains poorly understood. Transmission of infection from animals to humans via environmental reservoirs, such as water sources, has attracted attention as a potential source of endemic and epidemic infections, but existing mathematical models of waterborne disease transmission have limitations for studying this phenomenon, as they only consider contamination of environmental reservoirs by humans. This paper develops a mathematical model that represents the transmission of waterborne parasites within and between both animal and human populations. It also improves upon existing models by including animal contamination of water sources explicitly. Linear stability analysis and simulation results, using realistic parameter values to describe Giardia transmission in rural Australia, show that endemic infection of an animal host with zoonotic protozoa can result in endemic infection in human hosts, even in the absence of person-to-person transmission. These results imply that zoonotic transmission via environmental reservoirs is important. 
    

          Background:
        
      
      The SteriPEN(®) is a handheld device for disinfecting water with ultraviolet (UV) radiation. The manufacturer claims a reduction of at least 99.9% of bacteria, viruses, and protozoa. The present study intends to verify the general effectiveness of the device. Furthermore, the influence of bottle geometry and water movement is examined and the issue of user safety with regard to UV-C radiation is addressed.
    
      
      The Brazilian Ministry of Health proposed a research study involving municipal professional staff conducting both epidemiological and water quality surveillance to facilitate the integration of the data which they collected. It aimed to improve the intersectoral collaboration and health promotion activities in the municipalities, especially regarding drinking-water quality. We then conducted a study using the action-research approach. At its evaluation phase, a technique which we called 'the tree analogy' was applied in order to identify both possibilities and challenges related to the proposed interlinkage. Results showed that integrating the two data collection systems cannot be attained without prior institutional adjustments. It suggests therefore the necessity to unravel issues that go beyond the selection and the interrelation of indicators and compatibility of software, to include political, administrative and personal matters. The evaluation process led those involved to re-think their practice by sharing experiences encountered in everyday practice, and formulating constructive criticisms. All this inevitably unleashes a process of empowerment. From this perspective, we have certainly gathered some fruit from the Tree, but not necessarily the most visible. 
    
      
      Francisella tularensis DNA extractions and isolates from the environment and humans were genetically characterized to elucidate environmental sources that cause human tularemia in Turkey. Extensive genetic diversity consistent with genotypes from human outbreaks was identified in environmental samples and confirmed water as a source of human tularemia in Turkey. 
    
      
      We present a set of data on human and chicken Toxoplasma gondii seroprevalence that was investigated and analysed in light of groundwater vulnerability information in an area endemic for waterborne toxoplasmosis in Brazil. Hydrogeological assessment was undertaken to select sites for water collection from wells for T. gondii oocyst testing and for collecting blood from free-range chickens and humans for anti-T. gondii serologic testing. Serologic testing of human specimens was done using conventional commercial tests and a sporozoite-specific embryogenesis-related protein (TgERP), which is able to differentiate whether infection resulted from tissue cysts or oocysts. Water specimens were negative for the presence of viable T. gondii oocysts. However, seroprevalence in free-range chickens was significantly associated with vulnerability of groundwater to surface contamination (p < 0.0001; odds ratio: 4.73, 95% confidence interval: 2.18-10.2). Surprisingly, a high prevalence of antibodies against TgERP was detected in human specimens, suggesting the possibility of a continuous contamination of drinking water with T. gondii oocysts in this endemic setting. These findings and the new proposed approach to investigate and analyse endemic toxoplasmosis in light of groundwater vulnerability information associated with prevalence in humans estimated by oocyst antigens recognition have implications for the potential role of hydrogeological assessment in researching waterborne toxoplasmosis at a global scale.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Reports of outbreaks in Canada and the United States (U.S.) indicate that approximately 50% of all waterborne diseases occur in small non-community drinking water systems (SDWSs). Summarizing these investigations to identify the factors and conditions contributing to outbreaks is needed in order to help prevent future outbreaks.
    

          Background:
        
      
      Intermittent delivery of piped water can lead to waterborne illness through contamination in the pipelines or during household storage, use of unsafe water sources during intermittencies, and limited water availability for hygiene. We assessed the association between continuous versus intermittent water supply and waterborne diseases, child mortality, and weight for age in Hubli-Dharwad, India.
    
      
      In late 2014, a gastroenteritis outbreak occurred in a school in Shandong Province, eastern China. Hundreds of individuals developed the symptoms of diarrhoea and vomiting. Epidemiological investigation showed that food consumption was not linked to this outbreak, and unboiled direct drinking water was identified as the independent risk factor with a relative risk of 1·37 (95% confidence interval 1·03-1·83). Furthermore, examination of common bacterial and viral gastroenteritis pathogens was conducted on different specimens. Norovirus GI.1, GI.2, GI.6, GII.4, GII.6 and GII.13 were detected in clinical specimens and a water sample. GII.4 sequences between clinical specimens and the water sample displayed a close relationship and belonged to GII.4 variant Sydney 2012. These results indicate that direct drinking water contaminated by norovirus was responsible for this gastroenteritis outbreak. This study enriches our knowledge of waterborne norovirus outbreaks in China, and presents valuable prevention and control practices for policy-makers. In future, strengthened surveillance and supervision of direct drinking-water systems is needed. 
    
      
      Verotoxigenic Escherichia coli (VTEC) are significant for their low infectious dose, their potential clinical severity and the frequency with which they generate outbreaks. To describe the relative importance of different outbreak transmission routes for VTEC infection in Ireland, we reviewed outbreak notification data for the period 2004-2012, describing the burden and characteristics of foodborne, waterborne, animal contact and person-to-person outbreaks. Outbreaks where person-to-person spread was reported as the sole transmission route accounted for more than half of all outbreaks and outbreaks cases, most notably in childcare facilities. The next most significant transmission route was waterborne spread from untreated or poorly treated private water supplies. The focus for reducing incidence of VTEC should be on reducing waterborne and person-to-person transmission, by publicizing Health Service Executive materials developed for consumers on private well management, and for childcare facility managers and public health professionals on prevention of person-to-person spread. 
    
      
      Waterborne diseases such as cholera continue to pose serious public health problems in the world today. Transmission parameters can vary greatly with socioeconomic class (SEC) and the availability of clean water. We formulate a multi-patch waterborne disease model such that each patch represents a particular SEC with its own water source, allowing individuals to move between SECs. For a 2-SEC model, we investigate the conditions under which each SEC is responsible for driving a cholera outbreak. We determine the effect of SECs on disease transmission dynamics by comparing the basic reproduction number of the 2-SEC model to that of a homogeneous model that does not take SECs into account. We conclude by extending several results of the 2-SEC model to an n-SEC model. 
    

          Background & objectives:
        
      
      Despite remarkable progress in airborne, vector-borne and waterborne diseases in India, the morbidity associated with these diseases is still high. Many of these diseases are controllable through awareness and preventive practice. This study was an attempt to evaluate the effectiveness of a preventive care awareness campaign in enhancing knowledge related with airborne, vector-borne and waterborne diseases, carried out in 2011 in three rural communities in India (Pratapgarh and Kanpur-Dehat in Uttar Pradesh and Vaishali in Bihar).
    
      
      Chlorine and thermal treatments are the most commonly used procedures to control and prevent Legionella proliferation in drinking water systems of large buildings. However, cases of legionellosis still occur in facilities with treated water. The purpose of this work was to model the effect of temperature and free chlorine applied in similar exposure conditions as in drinking water systems on five Legionella spp. strains and two amoebal strains of the genera Acanthamoeba. Inactivation models obtained were used to determine the effectiveness of the treatments applied which resulted more effective against Legionella than Acanthamoeba, especially those in cystic stages. Furthermore, to determine the influence of the relationship between L. pneumophila and Acanthamoeba spp. on the treatment effectiveness, inactivation models of the bacteria-associated amoeba were also constructed and compared to the models obtained for the free living bacteria state. The Legionella-amoeba association did not change the inactivation models, but it reduced the effectiveness of the treatments applied. Remarkably, at the lowest free chlorine concentration, 0.5 mg L-1, as well as at the lowest temperatures, 50°C and 55°C, the influence of the Legionella-amoeba associate state was the strongest in reducing the effectiveness of the treatments compared to the free Legionella state. Therefore, the association established between L. pneumophila and amoebae in the water systems indicate an increased health risk in proximal areas of the system (close to the tap) where lower free chlorine concentrations and lower temperatures are commonly observed. 
    
      
      The close relationship between local residents and the Rio Doce and the river's recurrent flooding lead to continuous exposure of the population to waterborne diseases. Given the epidemiological importance of such diseases in the region, this study analyzes the association between risk perception of contamination and river water use, as well as the heuristic mechanisms used by individuals to shape their personal perception of risk. Regression models coupled with thematic network analysis were applied to primary data from 352 households in 2012. The data are representative of urban residents of Tumiritinga, Minas Gerais State, Brazil. The results show that while 92.6% of respondents perceived high risk of waterborne diseases, only 11.4% reported not making direct use of the river. This apparent paradox is explained by the lack of information on transmission mechanisms, underestimating the perception of contamination. Public campaigns to promote preventive behavior should stress how waterborne diseases are transmitted, using simple examples to reach a wider local audience. 
    
      
      Waterborne disease outbreaks (WBDO) of acute gastrointestinal illness (AGI) are a public health concern in France. Their occurrence is probably underestimated due to the lack of a specific surveillance system. The French health insurance database provides an interesting opportunity to improve the detection of these events. A specific algorithm to identify AGI cases from drug payment reimbursement data in the health insurance database has been previously developed. The purpose of our comparative study was to retrospectively assess the ability of the health insurance data to describe WBDO. Data from the health insurance database was compared with the data from cohort studies conducted in two WBDO in 2010 and 2012. The temporal distribution of cases, the day of the peak and the duration of the epidemic, as measured using the health insurance data, were similar to the data from one of the two cohort studies. However, health insurance data accounted for 54 cases compared to the estimated 252 cases accounted for in the cohort study. The accuracy of using health insurance data to describe WBDO depends on the medical consultation rate in the impacted population. As this is never the case, data analysis underestimates the total number of AGI cases. However this data source can be considered for the development of a detection system of a WBDO in France, given its ability to describe an epidemic signal. 
    
      
      Climate change is expected to increase the prevalence of acute and chronic diseases among human and animal populations within the Arctic and subarctic latitudes of North America. Warmer temperatures are expected to increase disease risks from food-borne pathogens, water-borne diseases, and vector-borne zoonoses in human and animal populations of Arctic landscapes. Existing high levels of mercury and persistent organic pollutant chemicals circulating within terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in Arctic latitudes are a major concern for the reproductive health of humans and other mammals, and climate warming will accelerate the mobilization and biological amplification of toxic environmental contaminants. The adverse health impacts of Arctic warming will be especially important for wildlife populations and indigenous peoples dependent upon subsistence food resources from wild plants and animals. Additional research is needed to identify and monitor changes in the prevalence of zoonotic pathogens in humans, domestic dogs, and wildlife species of critical subsistence, cultural, and economic importance to Arctic peoples. The long-term effects of climate warming in the Arctic cannot be adequately predicted or mitigated without a comprehensive understanding of the interactive and synergistic effects between environmental contaminants and pathogens in the health of wildlife and human communities in Arctic ecosystems. The complexity and magnitude of the documented impacts of climate change on Arctic ecosystems, and the intimacy of connections between their human and wildlife communities, makes this region an appropriate area for development of One Health approaches to identify and mitigate the effects of climate warming at the community, ecosystem, and landscape scales.
    
      
      As part of the international response to control the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa, the Department of Defense has deployed military personnel to train Liberians to manage the disease and build treatment units and a hospital for health care volunteers. These steps have assisted in providing a robust medical system and augment Ebola diagnostic capability within the affected nations. In order to prepare for the deployment of U.S. military personnel, the infectious disease risks of the regions must be determined. This evaluation allows for the establishment of appropriate force health protection posture for personnel while deployed, as well as management plans for illnesses presenting after redeployment. Our objective was to detail the epidemiology and infectious disease risks for military personnel in West Africa, particularly for Liberia, along with lessons learned from prior deployments. 
    
      
      Waterborne diseases continue to take a heavy toll on the global community, with developing nations, and particularly young children carrying most of the burden of morbidity and mortality. Starting with the historical context, this article explores some of the reasons why this burden continues today, despite our advances in public health over the past century or so. While molecular biology has revolutionized our abilities to define the ecosystems and etiologies of waterborne pathogens, control remains elusive. Lack of basic hygiene and sanitation, and failing infrastructure, remain two of the greatest challenges in the global fight against waterborne disease. Emerging risks continue to be the specter of multiple drug resistance and the ease with which determinants of virulence appear to be transmitted between strains of pathogens, both within and outside the human host.
    
      
      Culture methods for the detection of indicator bacteria are currently used for detection of waterborne bacteria. The need for an increased range of analyzed bacteria coupled with the obtainment of rapid and early results justify the development of a DNA microarray for the identification of waterborne pathogens. This DNA microarray has 16 implanted probes with a median size of 147 bases, targeting 12 different parameters, including all mandatory indicator microorganisms, such as Escherichia coli, Clostridium perfringens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, total and fecal coliforms and enterococci. The validation performed with DNA extracted from pure microbial cultures showed the suitability of the probes for detection of the target microorganism. To overcome the high dilution of water samples it was included either a prior culture step of bacterial contaminants retained after filtering 100 ml of water, or a 10-fold increase in the volume of filtered water, that resulted in the increase of the detected bacteria. The analysis of complex environmental water samples using culture methods and the DNA microarray revealed that the latter detected the same parameters plus other bacteria tested only in the DNA microarray. The results show that this DNA microarray may be a useful tool for water microbiological surveillance. 
    
      
      Determining the role of weather in waterborne infections is a priority public health research issue as climate change is predicted to increase the frequency of extreme precipitation and temperature events. To document the current knowledge on this topic, we performed a literature review of analytical research studies that have combined epidemiological and meteorological data in order to analyze associations between extreme precipitation or temperature and waterborne disease.A search of the databases Ovid MEDLINE, EMBASE, SCOPUS and Web of Science was conducted, using search terms related to waterborne infections and precipitation or temperature. Results were limited to studies published in English between January 2001 and December 2013.Twenty-four articles were included in this review, predominantly from Asia and North-America. Four articles used waterborne outbreaks as study units, while the remaining articles used number of cases of waterborne infections. Results presented in the different articles were heterogeneous. Although most of the studies identified a positive association between increased precipitation or temperature and infection, there were several in which this association was not evidenced. A number of articles also identified an association between decreased precipitation and infections. This highlights the complex relationship between precipitation or temperature driven transmission and waterborne disease. We encourage researchers to conduct studies examining potential effect modifiers, such as the specific type of microorganism, geographical region, season, type of water supply, water source or water treatment, in order to assess how they modulate the relationship between heavy rain events or temperature and waterborne disease. Addressing these gaps is of primary importance in order to identify the areas where action is needed to minimize negative impact of climate change on health in the future.
    
      
      Enteric illness contributes to a significant burden of illness in Canada and globally. Understanding its sources is a critical step in identifying and preventing health risks. Expert elicitation is a powerful tool, used previously, to obtain information about enteric illness source attribution where information is difficult or expensive to obtain. Thirty-one experts estimated transmission of 28 pathogens via major transmission routes (foodborne, waterborne, animal contact, person-to-person, and other) at the point of consumption. The elicitation consisted of a (snowball) recruitment phase; administration of a pre-survey to collect background information, an introductory webinar, an elicitation survey, a 1-day discussion, survey readministration, and a feedback exercise, and surveys were administered online. Experts were prompted to quantify changes in contamination at the point of entry into the kitchen versus point of consumption. Estimates were combined via triangular probability distributions, and medians and 90% credible-interval estimates were produced. Transmission was attributed primarily to food for Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, Cyclospora cayetanensis, Trichinella spp., all three Vibrio spp. categories explored, and Yersinia enterocolitica. Multisource pathogens (e.g., transmitted commonly through both water and food) such as Campylobacter spp., four Escherichia coli categories, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella spp., and Staphylococcus aureus were also estimated as mostly foodborne. Water was the primary pathway for Giardia spp. and Cryptosporidium spp., and person-to-person transmission dominated for six enteric viruses and Shigella spp. Consideration of the point of attribution highlighted the importance of food handling and cross-contamination in the transmission pathway. This study provides source attribution estimates of enteric illness for Canada, considering all possible transmission routes. Further research is necessary to improve our understanding of poorly characterized pathogens such as sapovirus and E. coli subgroups in Canada. 
    
      
      A symposium held in Guangzhou, China, aimed to become starting point of an international cooperation in the fight against waterborne diseases, which obtain more and more importance in times of global warming and globalization. 
    
      
      A two-year monitoring program of Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts, Giardia duodenalis cysts, Escherichia coli, Clostridium perfringens spores and adenovirus was conducted in three large rivers in France used for recreational activities and as a resource for drinking water production. Fifty-liter river water and one thousand-liter tap water samples were concentrated using hollow-fiber ultrafiltration and analyzed by molecular biology or laser-scanning cytometry. In order to evaluate watershed land use influence on microorganism concentration changes, occurrence and seasonality of microorganisms were studied. The highest concentrations of protozoan parasites and C. perfringens were found for one of the three sites, showing a high proportion of agricultural territories, forests and semi-natural environments, which may be partly attributable to soil leaching due to rainfall events. On the contrary, the highest concentrations of adenoviruses were found at the two other sites, probably due to strong urban activities. Health risk assessment was evaluated for each waterborne pathogen regarding exposure during recreational activities (for a single or five bathing events during the summer). The calculated risk was lower than 0.5% for parasites and varied from 1% to 42% for adenovirus. A theoretical assessment of microorganism removal during the drinking water treatment process was also performed, and it showed that an absence of microorganisms could be expected in finished drinking water. This hypothesis was confirmed since all tested tap water samples were negative for each studied microorganism, resulting in a risk for drinking water consumption lower than 0.01% for parasites and lower than 0.5% for adenovirus. 
    
      
      Microbial growth on medical and technical devices is a big health issue, particularly when microorganisms aggregate to form biofilms. Moreover, the occurrence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the clinical environment is dramatically growing, making treatment of bacterial infections very challenging. In search of an alternative, we studied a novel antimicrobial surface coating based on micro galvanic elements formed by silver and ruthenium with surface catalytic properties. The antimicrobial coating efficiently inhibited the growth of the nosocomial pathogens Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium as demonstrated by the growth inhibition on agar surface and in biofilms of antibiotic resistant clinical E. faecalis, E. faecium, and S. aureus isolates. It also strongly reduced the growth of Legionella in a drinking water pipeline and of Escherichia coli in urine. We postulate a mode of action of the antimicrobial material, which is independent of the release of silver ions. Thus, the novel antimicrobial coating could represent an alternative to combat microbial growth avoiding the toxic side effects of high levels of silver ions on eukaryotic cells. 
    
      
      National and sub-national governments develop and enforce regulations to ensure the delivery of safe drinking water in the United States (US) and countries worldwide. However, periodic contamination events, waterborne endemic illness and outbreaks of waterborne disease still occur, illustrating that delivery of safe drinking water is not guaranteed. In this study, we examined the potential added value of a preventive risk management approach, specifically, water safety plans (WSPs), in the US in order to improve drinking water quality. We undertook a comparative analysis between US drinking water regulations and WSP steps to analyze the similarities and differences between them, and identify how WSPs might complement drinking water regulations in the US. Findings show that US drinking water regulations and WSP steps were aligned in the areas of describing the water supply system and defining monitoring and controls. However, gaps exist between US drinking water regulations and WSPs in the areas of team procedures and training, internal risk assessment and prioritization, and management procedures and plans. The study contributes to understanding both required and voluntary drinking water management practices in the US and how implementing water safety plans could benefit water systems to improve drinking water quality and human health. 
    
      
      Mekong Delta Basin (MDB) is vulnerable to extreme climate and hydrological events. The objectives of this review are to understand of water related health effects exacerbated by climate change and the gaps of knowledge on the relationships between climate conditions, water quality, and water-related diseases in the MDB. The findings indicate that a few studies with qualitative emphases on the relationships between climate and water quality have been conducted in MDB, and they are insufficient to describe the pattern of climate-disease relationship. The diseases caused by chemical contaminants in relation to changes of climate conditions are neglected in MDB. We suggest further studies to examine the influence of short-term variation of climate conditions on water quality and water-related diseases for the purpose of public health and medical prevention, and due to the trans-boundary nature of MDB, developing partnership in data sharing and research collaboration among MDBs countries should be prioritized. 
    
      
      This project aims to increase the resilience of Cambodian communities to the health risks posed by climate change-related impacts on water-related diseases. There are a number of water-related diseases that are present in Cambodia and are likely to be susceptible to climate change. These include diarrheal diseases, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, melioidosis, viral hepatitis, and schistosomiasis. Certain subsectors of Cambodia's population may be more vulnerable than others with respect to climate change impacts on water and health, including agricultural workers and residents of flood-and drought-prone areas. The current level of understanding on the part of health professionals and other key stakeholders in Cambodia regarding the risks posed by climate change on water-sensitive diseases is relatively low. Strategies by which this understanding might be strengthened are suggested. 
    

          Objective:
        
      
      Water is an essential nutrient overlooked in many cross-cultural studies of human nutrition. The present article describes dietary water intake patterns among forager-horticulturalist adults in lowland Bolivia, compares daily intake with international references and examines if variation in how people acquire water relates to gastrointestinal illness.
    
      
      Accounts of drinking water-borne disease outbreaks have always captured the interest of the public, elected and health officials, and the media. During the twentieth century, the drinking water community and public health organizations have endeavored to craft regulations and guidelines on treatment and management practices that reduce risks from drinking water, specifically human pathogens. During this period there also evolved misunderstandings as to potential health risk associated with microorganisms that may be present in drinking waters. These misunderstanding or "myths" have led to confusion among the many stakeholders. The purpose of this article is to provide a scientific- and clinically-based discussion of these "myths" and recommendations for better ensuring the microbial safety of drinking water and valid public health decisions. 
    