International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijheh

Monitoring coliphages to reduce waterborne infectious disease
transmission in the One Water framework
Kari Fitzmorris-Brisolara a, *, Rasha Maal-Bared b, Thomas Worley-Morse c,
Ashley Danley-Thomson d, Mark Sobsey e
a

Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, School of Public Health, 2020 Gravier Street, 3rd Floor, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA
EPCOR Water Canada, EPCOR Tower, 2000 10423 101 Street, Edmonton, AB, T5H 0E8, Canada
Independent Researcher, 1665 Holly Street, Denver, CO, 80220, USA
d
Florida Gulf Coast University, 10501 FGCU Boulevard South, Fort Myers, FL, 33965, USA
e
Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of North Carolina, 148 Rosenau Hall, CB #743, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Coliphages
Viruses
Public health
Epidemiology
Wastewater treatment
One water
Reuse

Coastal waters, surface waters, and groundwater are impacted by wastewater and stormwater discharges, as well
as agricultural flows containing animal waste and nutrients. A One Water approach posits that components of the
water system have overlapping and interactive impacts on other aspects of the system, for which a compre­
hensive approach to water management is needed to further inform public health decisions. Current frameworks
for monitoring wastewater effluent and recreational surface waters include the measurement of fecal indicator
bacteria. Although viral pathogens are likely to be transported further and can survive longer than bacterial
pathogens, virus monitoring is not required for recreational waters. A scientific consensus is emerging that the
use of bacterial indicators alone does not account for nor represent the health risks associated with viral path­
ogens due to the differences in the fate and transport of bacterial versus viral pathogens in wastewater treatment,
surface water, and groundwater. Furthermore, it is likely that the public health risk associated with these
waterborne pathogens is variable and diverse. For example, under drought conditions, effluents of urban water
systems can comprise most of the dry weather flow in downstream waters, which are often used as sources of
drinking water. This de facto reuse could increase viral risk for the end users of this water. A One Water approach
will aid in protecting the health of the public from waterborne pathogens, regardless of where those pathogens
entered the water system. In this review, we assert that monitoring for fecal indicator viruses can complement
the monitoring of bacterial indicators, thereby improving public health protections. Bacteriophages have the
strongest research foundation and correlation with viral pathogens along with some prediction power for risk to
human health. Methods for detecting and quantifying coliphages are briefly summarized, as are challenges in the
implementation of testing. Key knowledge gaps and research priorities are discussed so that the potential value
and limitations of coliphage monitoring can be better addressed and understood.

1. Introduction

1957 waterborne disease outbreaks (average of 46 per year) with 642,
782 outbreak-associated illnesses from 50 states and six freely associ­
ated states/territories based on their passive and reactive monitoring
and reporting system (Dewey-Mattia et al., 2016). While the outbreak
associated cases are smaller in number than the occurrence of sporadic
cases of illness in recreational waters, the severity of illness in such cases
is far greater (DeFlorio-Barker et al., 2018). This significant disease
burden occurs despite numerous water quality monitoring requirements
at the federal and state levels that involve fecal bacterial testing, such as

1.1. The need for a virus indicator to manage water resources
Waterborne infections in the U.S. are common, but the true magni­
tude of waterborne illnesses is unknown with estimates ranging from
7.15 million (Collier et al., 2021) to 50 million illnesses per year due to
recreational waterborne exposure alone (DeFlorio-Barker et al., 2018).
From 1971 to 2013, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) reported

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: kbriso@lsuhsc.edu (K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara), rmaalbar@epcor.com (R. Maal-Bared).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2022.113921
Received 27 October 2021; Received in revised form 31 December 2021; Accepted 5 January 2022
Available online 20 January 2022
1438-4639/© 2022 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

E. coli, enterococci, or fecal coliforms (Hrudey and Hrudey, 2007, 2019;
USEPA, 2012, 2015b).
The Fourth U.S. National Climate Assessment notes that, “Projected
increases in extreme precipitation and flooding, combined with inade­
quate water and sewer infrastructure, can contribute to viral and bac­
terial contamination from combined sewage overflows and a lack of
access to potable drinking water, increasing exposure to pathogens that
lead to gastrointestinal illness” (Ebi et al., 2018). Extreme weather
events such as droughts, floods, hurricanes, and wildfires are stressing
our existing water and wastewater infrastructure (Chhetri et al., 2019),
as deteriorating infrastructure becomes more vulnerable to failure in the
face of stressors brought on by climate change and other factors (Lall
et al., 2018). While heavy rain events become more frequent and severe
in some locations, other areas experience drought, particularly in the
Southwest and Southern Great Plains of the United States. Given the
interconnected nature of our water and wastewater infrastructure, these
trends will likely increase the de facto reuse of water.
Given that 1) waterborne illness in the U.S. occur despite advances in
water management and sanitation, and 2) water quality may decline in
the face of climatic and other stressors, now is the time to examine
opportunities for enhancing the set of microbial water quality moni­
toring tools available to further protect the public from waterborne
pathogens. An important issue to assess is whether the monitoring of
waters could be enhanced by complementing the monitoring of fecal
indicator bacteria, such as E. coli and enterococci, with the monitoring of
fecal indicator viruses, such as bacteriophages.
Depending on the level of treatment, treated wastewater discharged
into surface waters may impact public health as wastewater effluent has
the potential to include enteric viruses (Gerba et al., 2018; Tandukar
et al., 2020; USEPA, 2016). In addition to the discharged wastewater
effluent, other products of wastewater treatment, such as biosolids and
reclaimed water can also contain viral pathogens (Bailey et al., 2018,
2020). This can result in a broad range of impacts since wastewater
effluent receiving waters are not only home to recreational activities;
they are essential drinking water sources, shellfish harvesting sites, and
animal and plant habitats (Boehm et al., 2019). Extensive reviews of
viral waterborne disease outbreaks in recreational waters (Gibson, 2014;
McMinn et al., 2017; Sinclair et al., 2009), reclaimed water (Deng et al.,
2019), groundwater (Gibson, 2014), irrigation water (Uyttendaele et al.,
2015), and other matrices with public health impacts (Dias et al., 2017;
Gibson, 2014; O’Brien and Xagoraraki, 2019) have been published.
Examples highlighting the potential impacts of aquatic ecosystem
contamination with treated or untreated wastewater on public health
are outlined in Tables SI–1 and are discussed in greater detail in the
section on “Burden, Etiology, and Epidemiology of Waterborne Illness”
below.
The growing interest in fecal viral indicator monitoring of water
systems is evidenced by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA) 2016 workshop to inform the development of the Clean
Water Act §304(a) Recreational Water Quality Criteria for Coliphages to
protect public health from fecally-contaminated water sources (USEPA,
2015b, 2016). Others have since recommended holistic approaches to
reduce viral contamination of water resources (Liu et al., 2021). Pres­
ently, in the U.S., drinking water, wastewater, biosolids, stormwater,
and shellfish are monitored under different regulatory frameworks at
state and federal levels, which in some respects presents an opportunity
to incorporate bacteriophage monitoring into the monitoring proced­
ures where they may be most beneficial. This has also been recognized as
a need beyond the borders of the U.S. and continues through work in
Europe for applications in the European Union (Ballesté et al., 2021;
Toribio-Avedillo et al., 2021). However, from a multiple-barrier, public
health protection perspective, it would be helpful to view these as part of
the same water system and consider the potential downstream impacts
of wastewater treatment and receiving ecosystem functions when
monitoring surface waters for viral contamination. This is referred to as
the One Water approach. The One Water approach highlights the

interconnectedness of all water, including its consumption, treatment,
usage, and residuals in our natural and engineered aquatic ecosystems. It
encourages managing all water in an integrated, inclusive, and sus­
tainable manner to secure a healthy and productive future for our local
and global communities (Mukheibir et al., 2014).
The objective of this review is to utilize the One Water framework to
evaluate bacteriophages as a viral indicator, emphasizing the strengths
and limitations of such an approach to protect public health, while
considering the growing threats posed by impacts of climate change,
aging water infrastructure, and the expectation of continued increases in
de facto reuse of wastewater. We discuss the use of viral indicators in
wastewater, biosolids, reclaimed water, recreational water, and
shellfish.
1.2. Limitations of fecal indicator bacteria
The wide variety of microbial pathogens that can be present in a
surface or wastewater samples, as well as the specific methods needed to
quantify various pathogens have presented a challenge to devising
simple but informative approaches to monitoring (A. S. Ferguson et al.,
2012; Rodrigues and Cunha, 2017). Thus, indicators have been used for
monitoring purposes that have historically been broken down into three
categories: 1) process microbial indicators, which demonstrate treat­
ment process efficacy, 2) fecal indicators, which confirm fecal contam­
ination, and 3) indicator organisms whose presence is used to predict the
presence and concentration of pathogens (Ashbolt et al., 2015; Figueras
and Borrego, 2010; USEPA, 2012). Additionally, indicator bacteria
monitored under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Recreational Water Quality Criteria indicate health risk (USEPA, 2012).
The use of index and indicator organisms to assess the microbiological
and sanitary quality of waters is well established and has been practiced
for over a century. Fecal indicator bacteria (FIB) are utilized to deter­
mine microbial water quality, pathogen presence, treatment perfor­
mance and/or health risk and include E. coli and enterococci (used for
Clean Water Act purposes). The presence of these FIB indicates likely
fecal contamination.
Characteristics of an ideal indicator of pathogen presence in water
have been proposed throughout the decades, going back to Bonde (1963,
1966, 1975) and Dufour (1984). Among those characteristics are a)
suitability for all water types; b) presence in water, wastewater,
reclaimed water and biosolids when pathogens are present; c) presence
in greater numbers than the pathogens; d) similar survival, disinfection,
and removal characteristics as the pathogen of interest; e) inability to
multiply in water; f) non-pathogenic; and g) detectable in low number
quickly, reliably and at low cost. There is an acknowledgement in the
public health and water/wastewater communities that there is no per­
fect indicator that meets all these requirements. However, within the
One Water framework the ideal indicator becomes more than just a
mimic of a pathogen, it requires the crossing of water matrices that have
historically been kept separate: drinking water, wastewater, recrea­
tional water. FIB constitute a pathogen screening tool that allows for
simple, cost-effective monitoring of the microbiological changes in
water quality, but the reliance on culture-based methods interferes with
the provision of real-time information due to result production taking
24–48 h. Prior to the use of microbial source tracking methods to
distinguish between human and nonhuman sources of fecal contami­
nation, E. coli has been regarded as a coliform that is relatively specific
for fecal sources (Rodrigues and Cunha, 2017; World Health Organiza­
tion, 2011) though it may also be present in non-fecally contaminated
ambient water (USEPA, 2015b).
Evidence of the ability to detect and quantify E. coli from sewage in
bathing waters goes back to at least the 1920s (Winslow and Moxon,
1928) and 1930s (Mallmann and Sypien, 1934; Scott, 1932). Based on
more recent epidemiological evidence from health effects studies of
bathers compared to non-bathers, concentrations of E. coli and also
enterococci in recreational waters have been documented as indicators
2



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

of human health risks. E. coli is significantly associated with gastroin­
testinal illness (USEPA, 2012; Wu et al., 2011) especially in freshwater
(Wade et al., 2003) and is present when fecal bacterial pathogens are
present (Rodrigues and Cunha, 2017). The availability of affordable,
fast, sensitive, specific, and easy one-step detection methods for E. coli
(e.g., enzyme-based methods) (APHA et al., 2017), along with a simple,
replicable Standard Methods such as U.S. EPA Method 1603 (USEPA,
2014), facilitated its adoption throughout the water industry (Wade
et al., 2006).
Similarly, enterococci have been used as FIB for monitoring waste­
water effluent quality and marine waters for over a century. The use of
enterococci as FIB in water and wastewater also goes back to the early
1900s, with streptococci initially quantified (Savage and Read, 1916)
and then later enterococci, when improved culture media were devel­
oped (Litsky et al., 1953, 1955). They are also indicators of human
health risk in the context of water recreation (USEPA, 2012). They are
typically, but not exclusively, found in the intestinal tract and feces of
humans and animals (Byappanahalli et al., 2012). Intestinal enterococci
can survive a range of environmental conditions including high tem­
perature and salinity, the latter making them suitable indicators for
detection of fecal contamination in marine waters. Selective solid and
liquid media are available for one-step detection and isolation of
enterococci, as well as Standard Methods (e.g., US EPA Method 1600)
(APHA et al., 2017). An EPA standard method for measuring enterococci
using the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is also available
(USEPA, 2015a). However, the accessibility of such nucleic acid-based
methods compared to culture-based methods to predict FIB concentra­
tions and human health risks in recreational waters is limited for some
who monitor and manage recreational water quality. In addition,
defined substrate technologies have been developed for the enumeration
of enterococci (e.g., Enterolert™), even though these have been asso­
ciated with high false positive rate in urban creek samples (Sercu et al.,
2011).
Despite the fact the FIB monitoring has been well-established for
decades, limitations remain. FIB are not suitable for estimating the fate
and transport of viral pathogens due to their larger size relative to vi­
ruses, which impacts settling and transport, as governed by Stoke’s Law
(Stokes, 1851). For example, while E. coli is approximately 1.0–2.0 μm
long with radius about 0.5 μm, the diameter of norovirus and the size of
adenoviruses are 27–38 nm and 90–100 nm, respectively. Additionally,
because viruses lack the metabolic burden of biological survival, they
can persist longer and be transported further than bacterial pathogens
(Boehm et al., 2019; Maraccini et al., 2016). As such, reported differ­
ences in environmental persistence, transport, and resistance to treat­
ment exhibited by FIB compared to viruses imply that bacterial
indicators are sub-optimal for evaluating the human health risk posed by
viral pathogens (EPA, 2015, 2017; WHO, 2011). These limitations, and
the potential value of bacteriophages as indicators of viral pathogen
presence, are described in the following section. For monitoring pur­
poses, model viral indicators would be organisms that resemble and
respond like waterborne viruses with respect to size and composition,
fate, transport, decay, removal, inactivation, and disinfection but have
the advantages of being abundant and are readily detectable by simple,
rapid, and inexpensive methods. The One Water framework also priori­
tizes the viral indicator that can cross boundaries of water types while
still protecting human health. The literature suggests that bacterio­
phages in general and coliphages more specifically appear to be well
suited for this purpose (Jofre et al., 2016; McMinn et al., 2017).

properties and structure of bacteriophages are comparable to that of
human and animal viruses thereby making them relatively good in­
dicators for the survival, persistence, removal and inactivation of
waterborne viruses of human concern (Jofre et al., 2016; McMinn et al.,
2017). This comparability to both human and animal viruses also marks
an aspect of One Water which is linking agriculture and utility knowl­
edge to improve water quality.
While previously believed to be fairly host-specific, new research is
highlighting that broad host range bacteriophages are more common
than previously thought (de Jonge et al., 2019). Thus, selection of the
appropriate bacteriophage indicator and its host bacterium are critical
for monitoring purposes to meet the requirements of an ideal indicator.
Commonly used bacteriophages for monitoring viral water quality
include:
1. Somatic coliphages, which infect E. coli and possibly other coliform
bacteria, are comprised of a number of different virus families, all of
which are non-enveloped (Havelaar, 1988; Kott, 1966)
a. Bacteriophage Mu, which is able to infect species of Escherichia
coli, Citrobacter freundii, Shigella sonnei, Enterobacter, and Erwinia
(Jakhetia and Verma, 2015),
2. F-specific bacteriophages, also known as male-specific bacterio­
phages, infect bacteria through the sex pili, which are coded by the F
plasmid. F-specific RNA bacteriophages (a subgroup of F-specific
bacteriophages) consist of a simple capsid with cubic symmetry and
a diameter of between 21 nm and 30 nm (Ross et al., 2016).
3. Bacteriophages infecting Bacteroides spp. can be useful to distinguish
phages from different animal fecal sources Bacteroides spp. are Gramnegative, obligate anaerobic, pleomorphic rod-shaped bacteria that
are commonly found in high concentrations in both human and other
animal feces, but are present in sewage at relatively low and
geographically variable concentrations. Some Bacteroides spp. host
strains (HSP40, RYC2056, RYC4023, GB124) are useful in discrimi­
nating phages from different animal fecal sources (Ebdon et al.,
2012; Gómez-Doñate et al., 2011), but major challenges prevail with
this indicator, such as cross reactivity, geographical limitations and
low/varying recoveries from wastewater (Harwood et al., 2013,
2014; McMinn et al., 2017).
4. Bacteriophages that infect enterococci (enterophages) have also
been used as indicators of viral water quality and for source tracking
(Byappanahalli et al., 2012; Purnell et al., 2011; Santiago-Rodriguez
et al., 2013; Wangkahad et al., 2017). Enterophages have been
shown to have survival times similar to human enteric viruses in both
fresh and marine waters (Calci et al., 1998), but more studies need to
be conducted to assess their use in temperate climates (McMinn
et al., 2017). Examples of enterophages include: the dsDNA lytic
phage φEF24C (infects E. faecium and has an icosahedral head of
~93 nm in diameter and a contractile tail ~204 nm in length) and
EFRM31 (member of the Siphoviridae family and has a long
non-contractile tail (206 nm, length) and a spherical capsid (55 nm,
width).
5. CrAssphage are another class of bacteriophages that have received
attention as molecular microbial source tracking indicators and as
indicators of viral contamination due to their relative abundance in
the human gut (Park et al., 2020; Sala-Comorera et al., 2021; Yutin
et al., 2018). However, crAssphage lack standard culture based
methods that have been validated, and molecular based assays are
typically used for quantification, which limits the applicability of
using crAssphage to determine wastewater treatment efficacy or to
predict the presence and/or concentrations of infectious human
enteric viruses in wastewater and water. This also limits the ability of
crAssphage to estimate the risks of gastrointestinal illness from water
exposures, such as recreational waters or drinking waters. Therefore,
while crAssphage have value as a microbial source tracking molec­
ular tool, the lack of a validated culture method limits the wide­
spread adoption and use of crAssphage as a viral indicator.

1.3. Bacteriophages and coliphages as indicators
Bacteriophages or phages are viruses that infect bacteria that have
been studied since the early 1900s (Duckworth, 1976). They consist of at
least a nucleic acid (the genome), a capsid, and in some cases additional
structures (e.g., tails, fimbriae, and lipid envelopes) (Santiago-Ro­
driguez and Hollister, 2019). The size, composition, morphology,
3



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Even though multiple candidate viral indicators exist, the two most
commonly used bacteriophages for viral water quality monitoring are
somatic and male-specific (F+) coliphages (Table SI 2). The U.S. EPA
Coliphage Experts Workshop (2016) reported that coliphages are more
similar to human pathogenic viruses than the commonly used FIB. The
workshop concluded that coliphages mimic the persistence of human
pathogenic viruses and can therefore be useful in evaluating individual
wastewater treatment processes, disinfection efficacy, and shellfish
harvesting waters (Griffith et al., 2016b; Soller et al., 2016; USEPA,
2016).
Somatic coliphages are lytic phages that attach to specific protein
receptors on the outer host cell membrane while male-specific (F+)
coliphages (F-RNA & F-DNA) infect via the host’s sex (F) pili. F+ phages
have been extensively studied due to their similarity to pathogenic
human enteric viruses in particular enteroviruses, caliciviruses, adeno­
virus, and hepatitis A and E virus (Hodgson et al., 2017). Data suggests
that F+RNA coliphages could be utilized to distinguish human from
non-human contamination and can be used for source tracking (J. E. Lee
et al., 2011; Stewart-Pullaro et al., 2006). Male-specific coliphage are
considered to resemble and respond more similarly to RNA viruses in
size, shape, structure and genome under some conditions (Hartard et al.,
2015; USEPA, 2015b, 2016). Somatic coliphages, however, persist
longer than male-specific coliphages and may be present in greater
concentrations in raw sewage (USEPA, 2015b, 2016).
There is currently no consensus on whether somatic or male-specific
coliphage would be preferable for various applications. There is evi­
dence that both are associated with gastrointestinal illness (McMinn
et al., 2017; Rodrigues and Cunha, 2017). Male-specific coliphage
respond more similarly to human enteric RNA viruses under some
conditions and are currently used successfully by the Interstate Shellfish
Sanitation Conference and Food and Drug Administration for shellfish
waters (USEPA, 2016). Somatic coliphage may persist longer than
male-specific coliphage and may be present in greater concentrations in
raw sewage. They are recommended for use as drinking water quality
indicator viruses by the European Union (Lettieri et al., 2020). Both
somatic and F-specific coliphages may be simultaneously detected using
E. coli C3000 host or E. coli CB390 (Bailey et al., 2017) and their pres­
ence can be detected in as little as 6 h. Several comparisons between
E. coli, somatic and F+RNA coliphages have been published (Payment
et al., 2003; Rodrigues and Cunha, 2017; USEPA, 2015b).

experiments or through assessment of outbreaks as low as 10 virions for
some but higher for others, based on 50% infectious dose (Teunis et al.,
2020; Thebault et al., 2013; Yezli and Otter, 2011). The viruses most
often implicated in waterborne disease outbreaks of gastrointestinal
illness include noroviruses (NoV), adenovirus (AdV), astrovirus, en­
teroviruses (EV), Hepatitis A virus (HAV), and rotavirus (RV) (Gibson,
2014).
Regarding the fate and transport of viral pathogens through waste­
water treatment, limited studies exist quantifying the removal of in­
fectious viral pathogens due to the method limitations and technical
demands for enteric viral quantification. This difficulty in culturing
some viruses creates challenges in understanding their rate of inacti­
vation through treatment and disinfection processes when compared to
FIB (Papafragkou et al., 2014). To address these viral method limita­
tions, coliphages have been used to evaluate the fate and transport of
viral pathogens in wastewater treatment. Nappier et al. (2019) con­
ducted a systematic literature search of peer-reviewed publications to
identify somatic and male specific coliphage density data in raw
wastewater and ambient waters. In raw wastewater, the analysis resul­
ted in seasonal density distributions of 6.5 log10 plaque forming units
(PFU)/L and 5.9 log10 PFU/L for somatic and male specific coliphages,
respectively. F-specific coliphage tended to perform better compared to
somatic coliphage and C. perfringens. Overall, FIB were better predictors
of bacterial and protozoan pathogen presence (compared to viral), re­
lationships were more probable under scenarios where both indicator
and pathogen were likely to be present at higher concentrations, and
enterococci and F-specific coliphage tended to be better predictors of
waterborne illness occurrence compared to other indicators (Korajkic
et al., 2018). Table 1 provides a summary of the data from multiple
sources where correlation was determined using a logistic regression
model presented as an odds ratio where greater than 1 indicates the
presence of the indicator is associated with the presence of the pathogen.
In general, the removal of indicators and pathogens in wastewater
treatment is variable and depends on the specific treatment process train
at each facility. An extensive literature review and comparison of viral,
bacterial and protozoan log removals during wastewater treatment and
disinfection is provided in the Review of Coliphages as Possible In­
dicators of Fecal Contamination for Ambient Water Quality by the U.S.
EPA (USEPA, 2015b). Depending on the process train, bacterial and viral
indicator removal can be approximately equal, or the bacterial indicator
removal can be up to one to three orders of magnitude better than for
viral indicators. Reported values in the literature for primary removal of
coliphages show less than 1-log of removal, with low removals expected
(Flannery et al., 2012; Lucena et al., 2004; Mandilara et al., 2006).
Secondary treatment of coliphages is highly variable depending on the
process. For example, lagoon treatment has been shown to provide be­
tween 0.45 and 2.2 log reductions (Davies-Colley et al., 2005), whereas
activated sludge and biological nutrient removal (BNR) facilities have
been shown to provide log removals of 1.54–4.19 (Aw and Gin, 2010;
Francy et al., 2012; Mandilara et al., 2006). Worley-Morse et al. (2019)
found for typical secondary treatment facilities, the facilities with BNR
had an approximate additional log removal of coliphages compared to
secondary facilities that did not nitrify.
Typically, for disinfection, facilities with traditional secondary
treatment with chlorine or peracetic acid disinfection have lower viral
inactivation efficiencies when compared to facilities with tertiary
treatment and facilities with UV or ozone disinfection (Worley-Morse
et al., 2019). Another concern for viral removal in wastewater treatment
is the impact that effluent ammonia can have on chlorine chemical
speciation and kinetics for bacterial indicators versus viral indicators.
When chlorine combines with ammonia, depending on the both the
concentrations of chlorine and ammonia, combined chlorine is formed
(monochloramine, dichloramine, and trichloramine). Although com­
bined chlorine provides rapid inactivation of bacterial indicators, com­
bined chlorine provides much slower inactivation of viral indicators
(Gray, 2014; Tyrrell et al., 1995; Zyara et al., 2016). This problem is

2. Viral sources, fate and transport in fresh and marine waters
Surface and marine waters are exposed to a variety of pathogen loads
from mammalian fecal matter, agricultural animal wastes, rain, and
runoff events, and treated wastewater effluent. Viral pathogens in sur­
face waters are exposed to a variety of environmental conditions that
influence viral fate and transport and impact the ultimate human disease
burden and associated risk for downstream recreational and surface
water users. This larger picture of how viruses move through the envi­
ronment as a whole represents the ultimate goal of One Water. To better
understand how wastewater treatment and environmental fate and
transport factors govern viral disease risk, this section will review viral
inactivation in wastewater treatment and the major fate and transport
mechanisms for viral pathogens and associated indicators, with a goal of
identifying the specific conditions conducive to higher concentrations of
viral pathogens and the associated public health risks.
2.1. Viruses in wastewater
Viruses transmitted through water are predominantly those that can
infect the gastrointestinal tract and are excreted in the feces of infected
humans (i.e., enteric viruses with fecal-oral transmission) (World Health
Organization, 2011). Enteric viruses are excreted in feces with viral fecal
concentrations as high as 1012 viruses per gram of feces (Sano et al.,
2016). Viruses have low infective doses estimated by human challenge
4



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Table 1
Number of studies correlated and uncorrelated with the outcome of the logistical regression analysis of the association between the coliphages and the pathogens.
Indicator

# of studies:
Uncorrelated

# of studies:
Correlated

Measure of
correlation

Coliphages
F-specific coliphages

45
24

40
16

OR = 1.29
OR = 1.27

F-RNA coliphages

15

8

OR = 0.75

Somatic coliphages
C. perfringens

20
22

10
21

OR = 0.70
OR = 1.39

E. coli
Fecal coliforms
Total coliforms
Enterococci
Heterotrophic
bacteria (HPC)

29
78
51
34
12

11
48
44
12
8

OR = 0.52
OR = 0.84
OR = 1.28
OR = 0.47
OR = 0.95

Examples of significant associations reported

F+ coliphage positively correlated with norovirus concentrations in
freshwater
F+ coliphage had strong association with MRSA and S. aureus presence
in brackish waters
Adenoviruses in brackish waters
Campylobacter spp., Giardia and Cryptosporidium in freshwater
Human adenoviruses in freshwater
Campylobacter spp., Giardia and Cryptosporidium in freshwater
L. monocytogenes, Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7, Campylobacter
spp., Cryptosporidium and Giardia in freshwater
Weak association with Campylobacter spp. and Vibrio
parahaemolyticus in brackish waters
Human adenoviruses in freshwater
Human adenoviruses in freshwater

further compounded by the fact that a majority of the wastewater
treatment facilities use chlorine disinfection, as documented in a na­
tional survey by Leong (2008) in which it was found that 79% of the
utilities surveyed used chorine disinfection. And although UV is
increasingly being adopted by utilities, the percentage of facilities that
completely nitrify ammonia to nitrate is unknown.
Alternatively, while UV disinfection provides faster kinetics at
typical doses and contact times compared to combined chlorine, some
viruses are also more resistant to UV than FIB (Hijnen et al., 2006; Meng
and Gerba, 1996). For example, adenoviruses are particularly resistant
to ultraviolet disinfection (UV) (Rattanakul and Oguma, 2020; Thomp­
son et al., 2003; World Health Organization, 2011) and more resistant
than other waterborne enteric viruses with single and double-stranded
RNA genomes (USEPA, 2015b). This suggests that multi-disinfectant
systems may be needed if additional removal is desired. For example,
some studies indicate that even advanced wastewater treatment result in
relatively high levels of infectious virus pathogens, such as adenovi­
ruses, remaining in tertiary-treated and disinfected effluents (Bailey
et al., 2018). Furthermore the presence of human enteric viruses has
been reported in chlorinated secondary effluent, tertiary effluent, and
can even persist in effluents after some advanced treatment, which im­
pacts the risk for downstream water users (Blatchley et al., 2007; Eftim
et al., 2017; Pouillot et al., 2015; Rose et al., 2004; Simmons and
Xagoraraki, 2011).
De facto reuse of wastewater, which occurs when upstream waste­
water discharges contribute a significant amount to a downstream
drinking water supply even though it is not specifically permitted as a
water reuse project (National Academies Press, 2012), can further
complicate the pathogen health risk situation. De facto reuse occurs
naturally, as upstream users of the river discharge treated wastewater
further downstream, where it becomes the source for downstream
drinking water users. For example, consider the multitude of drinking
water and wastewater facilities in the Colorado and the Mississippi river
basins. Rice et al. (2013) found that between 1980 and 2008, waste­
water effluent contributions to drinking water sources in the top 25
cities increased by 68% from 4887 to 8241 MGD (214–361 m3/s). A de
facto reuse model that included 82% of the U.S. population found that
drought conditions contributed to cases where drinking water sources
were comprised of at least 95% treated wastewater effluent, and 32 of
the 80 drinking water sources modeled under drought conditions were

Source
Wu et al. (2011)
Rezaeinejad et al.
(2014)
Griffith et al.
(2016)
Jiang et al. (2001)
Devane et al.
(2014)
Wyer et al. (2012)
Devane et al.
(2014)
Wilkes et al. (2009)
Viau et al. (2011)
Wyer et al. (2012)
Wu et al. (2011)
Wu et al. (2011)
Wyer et al. (2012)
Wu et al. (2011)

comprised of at least 50% treated wastewater (Rice and Westerhoff,
2015). Therefore, when considering the final fate and transport of vi­
ruses in wastewater and water for public health risk, it is important to
take into consideration the upstream treatment processes. For these
reasons, monitoring frameworks that rely exclusively on the measure­
ment of bacteria may underestimate health risks posed by viral patho­
gens from municipal wastewater treatment systems, although further
research is needed to verify these observations.
2.2. Fate and transport of viruses in fresh and marine waters
Once viruses have entered a surface water body, the major physical
and chemical fate and transport mechanisms for viruses include diffu­
sion, advection, sorption and settling, desorption, and decay (USEPA,
2015b). These mechanisms are also influenced by the temperature of the
receiving water body, intensity of the solar radiation, the water quality
matrix, and the concentrations of predatory organisms and antiviral
chemicals such as enzymes, as well as the isoelectric point and hydro­
phobic properties of the specific virus, and downstream travel time.
2.3. Viral transport
2.3.1. Dilution into receiving water body
Typical wastewater effluent viral concentrations can vary from nondetect to 106 infectious viral particles per 100 mL, depending on the
specific treatment processes, disinfectant, and quantification method
(Prado et al., 2019; Worley-Morse et al., 2019). Upon discharge to the
receiving body, the effluent is typically diluted by the receiving stream.
The overall extent of dilution depends on the flow of the receiving
stream and stream location of the discharge. Typically, dilution would
be highest under non-drought conditions and when the discharge is
located further downstream than upstream, whereas dilution is mini­
mized further upstream during drought conditions. In some cases, the
stream flow can be comprised of mostly treated wastewater, such as the
case of an effluent dominated stream during drought conditions (Rice
et al., 2015; Rice and Westerhoff, 2015).
2.3.2. Adsorption, aggregation and occlusion impacts on transport
Basic virology has indicated the importance of viral structure on the
adsorption of infecting particles on the surface of cells, in particular the
5



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

receptors on the cell surface and the virion attachment proteins in the
capsid (Mateu, 2013). Though this is a simplistic view of the internal
structural impacts of the virus, for the purpose of this paper we will focus
on the external forces impacting the transport of viral particles in
wastewater and water. Given that viruses typically range in size from 10
to 100 nm and are colloidal particles, they will generally stay in sus­
pension unless they become aggregated, adsorbed to, embedded in or
occluded in another larger particle and settled out as governed by
Stoke’s Law (Stokes, 1851). As suspended colloids, viral particle
movement in aqueous and porous media is governed by Brownian mo­
tion and the bulk movement of the liquid (DeNovio et al., 2004; Murray
and Jackson, 1992; Tufenkji, 2007). When compared to bacteria (0.5–5
μm) and protozoa (5–20 μm), viruses (10–100 nm) are more likely to
stay in suspension and be transported through advection, and dispersion
for both surface water and groundwater.
Sorption and aggregation processes govern the attachment of viral
particles to other viruses or other solids. Sorption and aggregation are
equilibrium processes governed mainly by DLVO theory (Derjaguin and
Landau, 1941; Verwey and Overbeek, 1948), based on the attractive van
Der Waals force, the repulsive electrostatic force, and the specific
environmental chemistry. These processes depend on the pH of the
environment, the relative ratio of cations, including monovalent, diva­
lent, and trivalent cations, and the overall ionic strength of the solution,
such as the salinity (Azadpour-Keeley et al., 2003; Bales et al., 1991;
Yates et al., 1987). Aggregation occurs when viruses become attached to
each other, which can occur initially in host cells or later in the extra­
cellular environment, if the number of viruses is sufficiently high for
them to interact by the same physical-chemical processes that mediate
sorption to other particles.
The ability of a virus particle to remain suspended in water is
mediated by its surface functional groups, whether their protein coats
are protonated or unprotonated, and the resulting isoelectric point and
zeta potential as well as hydrophobicity of the viral particle. The viral
particle’s isoelectric point is an indicator of what pH ranges and to what
extent the viral particle is likely to adsorb or desorb to another particle
or surface, and depending on the environmental pH conditions, the
extent of adsorption will vary. Animal viruses have isoelectric points
that range from 2.6 to 8.1 (Michen and Graule, 2010), and the spherical
bacteriophages MS2, PRD1, Q beta, phi X174, and PM2 have differing
isoelectric points of 3.9, 4.2, 5.3, 6.6, and 7.3, respectively (Dowd et al.,
1998). Viruses with higher isoelectric points (greater than 5) are less
mobile (C. Ferguson et al., 2003). However, isoelectric point alone is
insufficient to describe virus adsorption to surfaces, because both sur­
face charges and hydrophobicity mediate this process. Virus adhesion is
a complex process and other surface properties are also mediators (Dika
et al., 2015).
The typical transport options for viral particles in surface water de­
pends on whether the viral particle is adsorbed to another particle. Nonadsorbed viral particles are transported through advective flows with
the bulk liquid and through diffusive flows based on the concentration
gradient of the virus. Non-adsorbed viral particles can also enter
groundwater through infiltration and be transported with the ground
water. Viral advection and dispersion in groundwater is a common
transport mechanism and viral particles have been known to travel over
400 m in groundwater, given that size exclusion is not a dominant
removal mechanism (Azadpour-Keeley et al., 2003; Gerba and Keswick,
1981; Sobsey et al., 1987; Yates et al., 1987).
Adsorbed viral particles will settle out at different rates as governed
by Stoke’s Law (Stokes, 1851). Depending on the mass density of the
aggregate particle, some particles will settle out and be subject to
advective transport, whereas other particles with settle out and become
reservoirs of viral particles until further disturbed and released or
inactivated through a wide variety of physical chemical and biological
processes. Viruses shed in fecal matter may have an increased rate of
persistence in the environment due to the proximity to other viruses as
well as other particles, as compared to viruses shed in urine. Particle

associated viruses remain viable for longer periods of time compared to
dispersed (free floating) viruses due to the particle potential to offering
shielding from adverse environmental conditions (Rachmadi et al.,
2016).
Overall, sorption of viral particles is governed by the specific
morphology and surface properties of the virus, as well as the specific
environmental characteristics of the surrounding medium or matrix.
High adsorption favors less transport, often at lower pH, high ionic
strength/salinity, higher hydrophobicity and higher matrix carbon,
while lower adsorption favors more transport, often at higher pH, low
ionic strength, and low hydrophobicity and matrix carbon (Azuaga
et al., 1990; Bales et al., 1991; Goyal and Gerba, 1979; Kimura et al.,
2008; Lipson and Stotzky, 1983). Nevertheless, predicting the real time
adsorption and desorption equilibrium of viruses and particles is diffi­
cult in practice due to the varying competing environmental conditions
and their influences. Specific areas for further research include how
wastewaters, biosolids, soils and sediments function as viral reservoirs
with surface and groundwater flow; how competing interactions of
environmental conditions such as pH, salinity, temperature, and particle
size distribution impact bulk viral adsorption equilibrium kinetics; and
how seasonal changes impact these interactions (Characklis et al., 2005;
Krometis et al., 2007).
2.4. Viral decay and replication
The decay of viruses of human health concern has been studied and
reviewed for decades and a variety of factors have been identified that
influence virus survival or inactivation, including salinity or ionic
strength, chemical composition of water and wastewater, pH, temper­
ature, sunlight exposure, turbidity and suspended solids concentrations,
organic matter, biological and enzymatic activity and predation, mois­
ture content in soils and sediments, and air-water-solid interfacial stress
(Korajkic et al., 2019; Murphy, 2015). Viruses are exposed to a suite of
stressors and physical/chemical processes that govern their replication
and degradation. The aquatic environment (salinity, pH, biology,
turbidity), sunlight, and temperature all impact viral and viral indicator
decay rates (Boehm et al., 2019; Savichtcheva and Okabe, 2006; Sinton
et al., 1999). The extent of these impacts is a function of the viral
morphology, which can inhibit or hasten viral decay.
Viruses in the aquatic environment are exposed to a range of salin­
ities, including fresh, brackish, and marine ecosystems. Generally, vi­
ruses and viral indicators decay more rapidly in seawater than fresh
water. McMinn et al. (2017) reported that fresh water concentrations of
viruses and viral indicators were about an order of magnitude higher
than the concentrations reported in marine waters. Yet, viral activity in
seawater remains high as work has demonstrated that bacteriophages
govern nutrient flows and cellular turnover in marine ecology (Wom­
mack and Colwell, 2000). Somatic coliphages, in general, are more
sensitive to salt water than F+ coliphages (Sinton et al., 2002). In
addition to these deleterious effects of salinity, work by Savichtcheva
and Okabe (2006) demonstrated that male-specific coliphages are also
more sensitive to solar inactivation at higher salinity levels. Viruses in
estuarine systems may have higher decay rates than in fresh and marine
systems (Boehm et al., 2019). This may be due to the diverse microbiota
that is specific to estuarine systems, and not necessarily the higher
salinity of brackish waters. Enteric virus removal in wetlands varies
greatly, depending on viral species, from 0 to 4 log removal (Rachmadi
et al., 2016). Karim et al. (2008) found significant removal of the coli­
phage MS2 in the non-filtered and filter sterilized samples compared to
the autoclaved water control, suggesting the presence of microbial or
plant metabolites that were responsible for the increased removal. They
also suggested that the presence of aquatic plants promotes increased
natural flora and plant metabolites near plant rhizospheres, which may
explain the increased viral removal in wetlands (Karim et al., 2008).
Salinity and the ratio of cations is important for adsorption. Ionic
strength (salinity) has been shown to promote viral attachments, with
6



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

higher levels of adsorption in marine environments when compared to
freshwater environments. Research has shown that the relative con­
centrations of cations impact adsorption, with trivalent cations sup­
porting more adsorption than divalent cation and monovalent cations
(C. Ferguson et al., 2003; Pham et al., 2009; Templeton et al., 2008).
Higher divalent cations result in improved floc matrix formation due to
cation bridging, and divalent cations compete with monovalent cations
for biopolymer binding sites.
Predation and enzymatic degradation are typical removal and inac­
tivation mechanisms of viruses and viral indicators in non-sterile waters.
Some species of bacteria produce proteolytic enzymes that are capable
of degrading viral protein capsids, resulting in viral inactivation (Ward
et al., 1986). Research by Karim et al. (2008) suggested that
male-specific coliphages degrade faster in the presence of wetland
vegetation and the associated microbial communities. Olive et al. (2020)
observed that predation by protists also contributed to the reduction of
human enterovirus echo 11 in marine and fresh surface waters. Rach­
madi et al. (2016) found that constructed wetlands provided between 1
and 3 log of viral removal depending on the viral phenotype and
morphology. Work by Pinheiro et al. (2007) has suggested that ciliate
protozoa inactivate bacteriophage T4 through predation. Ciliate
virophagy, by metabolically active ciliates conducting micropinocytosis,
is a mechanism of viral inactivation in natural waters and sewage
treatment (Pinheiro et al., 2007). Olive et al. (2020) observed that
predation by protists also contributed to the reduction of human
enterovirus echo 11 in marine and fresh surface waters. In a study by
Sime-Ngando and Ram (2005), the presence of grazers was positively
correlated with bacterial and viral proliferation in oligotrophic condi­
tions, suggesting a relatively stable co-existence between protozoa and
viruses for microbial diversity. Taken together, these studies suggest
that both predation and enzymatic degradation are both pathways for
viral inactivation and removal.
For viral inactivation, there is a positive linear relationship with
increasing temperatures and increasing activation rates (Bertrand et al.,
2012; Boehm et al., 2019). Larger k values have been observed for the
temperature effect when using culture based methods as compared to
molecular methods, highlighting one of the limitations of molecular
methods for quantification (Boehm et al., 2019). This temperature effect
suggests seasonal changes in inactivation rates due to ambient and
aquatic temperature changes, suggesting site specific temperature
inactivation variability that is dependent on local conditions (Toze et al.,
2012). However it is also important to note the additional seasonal
impacts such as precipitation, and resulting dilution/concentration im­
pacts (Rusiñol et al., 2015) along with seasonal and other periodic
changes in disease trends in the population (Li et al., 2011).
In general, viral decay increases with higher solar radiation (Silver­
man et al., 2013; Sinton et al., 1999). Because nucleic acids most
strongly absorb electromagnetic radiation in wavelengths between 260
and 280 nm, viruses and viral indicators are susceptible to UV inacti­
vation. Viral decay is positively correlated to temperature and photo­
synthetically active radiation (PAR) (Wei et al., 2018). Others have also
reported significant interactions with temperature, the water quality
matrix, and sunlight (Bertrand et al., 2012). In a study of enteric bac­
teria, somatic coliphage and male-specific coliphage survival in a 4:1
blend of surface water and reclaimed water exposed to natural sunlight
or kept in the dark at temperatures between 10 and 20 ◦ C for 5 days,
sunlight exposure was the most important contributor to coliphage and
bacteria reductions (Bailey et al., 2019). Particles such as natural
organic matter (NOM) and suspended solids in the water column can
attenuate the UV radiation and decrease viral inactivation due to UV
absorption and a decreased UV transmittance. Alternatively, sunlight
exposure with NOM has been shown to create reactive oxygen species
and increase viral decay (Silverman et al., 2013). These suspended solids
can also offer additional protection through adsorption and settling
which further limits UV light exposure. Taken together evidence sug­
gests that solar inactivation of viruses in water is sometimes significant,

but it is also highly variable and depends on a variety of factors,
including average surface water depth, turbidity, and the amount and
distribution of NOM, suggesting the overall impact of viral inactivation
by sunlight is highly site specific and variable. Further research is
needed to better understand the overall impacts and conditions where
solar inactivation is greatest.
Regarding overall inactivation rates and decay coefficients, in a
meta-analysis of decay rates of waterborne mammalian viruses and co­
liphages in surface waters Boehm et al. (2019) found that on average
enteroviruses had the largest decay coefficients followed by coliphages,
rotoviruses, adenoviruses, and noroviruses. Boehm et al. (2019) re­
ported that average decay values varied from 0.07 to 0.9 per day, with
specific impacts based on the temperature, water type, and sunlight
conditions. For reference, when compared to bacterial indicator reduc­
tion, k values for E. coli and enterococci ranged from 1.4 to 6.6 per day,
depending on the specific conditions, highlighting the faster decay of
bacterial indicators than viral indicators (Maraccini et al., 2016).
However, additional research is needed to better understand the dif­
ferences in decay between viruses and bacteria under different condi­
tions in multiple settings. For viral indicators, generally, k values were
largest at higher temperatures with sunlight in estuarine waters. It was
found that F+ coliphages had similar decay constants to enteroviruses,
human astroviruses, and Rotavirus A, but they may over-predict the
decay for Mastadenovirus, Hepatovirus A, Norwalk virus, and human
astroviruses. For coliphages, Boehm (2019) also found that the rate
constants were larger for marine and estuarine environments compared
to freshwater environments. The specific rates and extents of coliphage
and human enteric virus reductions can be difficult to predict due to the
heterogeneity of viral morphologies and other physical and chemical
differences.
Although viral replication is possible in the environment, the overall
magnitude contribution of replication to viral fate is not well studied
and will not be discussed in detail. Viral replication, on the other hand,
requires the collision of a host cell and the viral particle in the presence
of divalent cations. In environmental media, the collision frequency of a
bacterial cell and a viral particle such as a coliphage depends on the
mixing of the solution, the concentration of host cells, and the concen­
tration of viral particles. Because of their relatively low concentrations
in wastewaters and other environmental media, virus replication is not
likely to influence viral fate, given the relative lack of viral hosts and
phages. Jofre (2009) suggests that the contribution of replication in the
environment of somatic coliphages would be minimal on the numbers of
somatic coliphages detected in water environments. Thus, the authors
concluded that somatic coliphage replication in the environment should
not be argued as a limitation to the use of somatic coliphages as in­
dicators. Instead, the major fate mechanisms for viruses are physical
removal or partitioning in various environmental compartments (e.g.,
surface water, ground water, sediments and soils) (Lebarbenchon et al.,
2011; Pinon and Vialette, 2018; Xagoraraki et al., 2014). However, it is
important to note this is not the case for FIB. Studies have indicated the
potential for regrowth in the environment along with accretion of
antibiotic resistance in E. coli (Gaddad and Rodgi, 1987; Suzuki et al.,
2019).
In summary, due to the size differences between bacteria and viruses
and the metabolic overhead of biological survival for bacteria, viruses
can persist longer and be transported further than bacterial pathogens.
The natural attenuation of viruses and bacteriophages in the environ­
ment depends on many environmental factors: including, aquatic envi­
ronment type and resulting biosphere, physical and chemical factors
such as turbidity, temperature, sunlight, and aquatic biological activity.
Therefore, heterogeneous and uncertain viral survival along with sub­
sequent exposure risk is expected. Risks are likely highest under con­
ditions that minimize viral decay, such as in fresh waters during winter
months and drought conditions at latitudes and elevations with lower
solar irradiance, where there is a short travel time to beneficial reuse or
human recreation sites. Risks are likely lower in estuary and marine
7



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

waters during warm seasons with higher temperature and higher solar
irradiance in non-drought conditions where there is a longer travel time
to beneficial reuse or recreational use.

recommended threshold resulting in an estimated illness rate of 36 in
1000 was 126 CFU/100 mL for E. coli and 35 CFU/100 mL for entero­
cocci (USEPA, 2012). In epidemiological studies, individuals were
enrolled at beaches and other sites of surface water recreation, inter­
viewed at baseline, and water samples were collected for analyses of
fecal indicator bacteria. The occurrence of gastrointestinal and/or other
illnesses among study participants was determined by following-up with
participants, generally by telephone, approximately 10–14 days later.
Most of the studies included both water recreators (generally swimmers)
and non-water recreators. While study designs and definitions varied
and evolved over the decades, nearly all studies reported higher rates of
illness among water recreators than non-water recreators. Levels of
some fecal indicator bacteria, such as E. coli or enterococci, were
generally predictive of illness occurrence among swimmers enrolled at
beaches impacted by human fecal contamination; at relatively pristine
beaches, fecal indicator bacteria were generally not predictive of illness
occurrence.
The varied results from epidemiological beach studies are compro­
mised by the differences in fate and transport between viral and bacte­
rial pathogens. For example, due to viral transport after a fecal
contamination event, viral pathogens may be present at levels posing
health risks whereas bacterial indicators may be non-detectable (absent)
in typical water volumes analyzed for them. Methods for water sampling
and analysis varied substantially among studies, as did definitions of
illness and methods for data analysis. In two of these studies, neither
bacterial indicators nor coliphage were predictive of gastrointestinal
(GI) or other illness (such as skin rash, eye infections, or respiratory
illness) (Abdelzaher et al., 2011; Dorevitch et al., 2015). One study
found bacterial indicators and somatic coliphage to reliably predict GI
illness (Wiedenmann et al., 2006); three other studies found bacterial
indicators and coliphage to predict GI illness in some settings (usually,
days or locations of human fecal pollution impacts) using some metrics
(such presence/absence vs. a log10 scale) but not others (Benjamin-­
Chung et al., 2017; Griffith et al., 2016a; Wade et al., 2010). One study
found bacterial indicators but not coliphage to be predictive of illness
(van Asperen et al., 1998). Two studies found that coliphage but not
bacterial indicators independently predicted GI illness and also skin rash
in one of the studies (Colford et al., 2007; J. V. Lee et al., 1997). Overall,
coliphage has shown a variety of successes and shortcomings, but has at
a minimum proven to be worth further study to determine its potential
as an indicator of health risk among water recreators.
In an effort to support same-day public notification about elevated
health risks at beaches, the U.S. EPA has standardized a rapid molecular
method using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (USEPA 2015)
along with criteria values for that method (USEPA 2012). However,
molecular methods are not as widely available as culture-based methods
in many jurisdictions responsible for recreational water quality moni­
toring. Current EPA standard methods (USEPA Method 1642, (USEPA,
2018a); USEPA Method 1643, (USEPA, 2018b)) for coliphage testing
take several days to generate results, limiting their utility for timely
notification of the public notification about water quality at beaches,
which can substantially vary from day to day. However, improved and
evolving coliphage testing methods that can provide same-day results
are being developed (Blanch et al., 2020; Dorevitch et al., 2020; USEPA,
2015; Toribio-Avedillo et al., 2020; Wade et al., 2010).
Quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) is an approach to
mathematically model health risks using available information about
pathogens (or microbial predictors of pathogen concentration or pres­
ence) for assessment of exposures and infectivity dose-response re­
lationships obtained from human volunteer studies. to estimate health
effects. From these parameters, human health risks can be quantitatively
characterized. Although estimating reliable human health risks using
QMRA approaches are becoming more widely used including those for
comparisons of the relative of risks of various scenarios of exposure or
water treatment, they are still considered speculative for some
applications.

3. Burden, etiology, and epidemiology of waterborne illness
Waterborne illnesses impact a wide variety of water end users
through recreational water, drinking water, and irrigation water. The
minimization of the human health impacts of waterborne pathogens best
be optimized through the One Water framework. This framework allows
for the blending of public and private expertise, regional collaboration
on water management, technology development and adoption all with
the goal of reducing disease burden and improving efficiency in a time of
limited resources. Bacterial, viral, and protozoan pathogens implicated
in waterborne outbreaks are summarized in Tables SI–1. The following
sections highlight the specific etiology and epidemiology of waterborne
illnesses in recreational water, drinking water, and agriculture with a
specific focus on viral pathogens.
3.1. Recreational waters
The role of human enteric viruses in waterborne illness has been
widely reported (Gerba et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2001; Liu et al., 2021;
Soller et al., 2010; Tandukar et al., 2020). Over the last two decades,
microbial risk assessments and epidemiological data have indicated vi­
ruses as one of the major contributors to gastrointestinal illnesses
associated with primary contact recreation in surface waters impacted
by human sources (Nappier et al., 2019). During 2009–2019, public
health officials from 31 states in the USA voluntarily reported 119 un­
treated recreational water–associated outbreaks, resulting at least 5240
cases, with 103 of the outbreaks (87%) occurring during June–August
when recreational activity is highest (Vanden Esschert et al., 2020).
Among the 119 outbreaks, 88 (74%) had confirmed etiologies. The
leading etiologies were enteric pathogens: norovirus (19 [22%] out­
breaks; 1858 cases); Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli (STEC) (19
[22%]; 240), Cryptosporidium (17 [19%]; 237), and Shigella (14 [16%];
713). DeFlorio-Barker et al. (2018) estimated an annual cost of $2.2–3.7
billion for illnesses directly related to surface water recreation. Simi­
larly, Adams et al. (2017) estimated the annual cost of hospital emer­
gency department visits and hospitalizations (approximately 477,000
events in total) associated with the water-transmissible pathogens at
$3.8 billion. However, this study did not specifically identify exposure
sources, and therefore disease transmission could be not only by water
exposure but other exposure sources and pathways as well. Given the
economic burden of disease, especially considering the contribution of
viral pathogens, improved monitoring for viral enteric pathogens in
water as well as other important exposure sources should have signifi­
cant public health impact.
In 2018, the World Health Organization published updated recom­
mendations for bathing water quality under the Bathing Water Directive
(BWD) (2006/7/EC), which is widely used in European countries and
some other countries worldwide (World Health Organization, 2018).
After careful review by experts, it was concluded that current evidence
does not support the inclusion of a viral indicator (or viral pathogen) as a
regulatory parameter within the BWD. However, there was encourage­
ment for further efforts to develop and evaluate indicator viruses for use
in managing recreational bathing waters.
Over the past century, water quality guidelines and standards in the
USA have been developed to protect the health of those who swim and
engage in other types of contact recreation in surface waters (i.e, oceans,
lakes, rivers). Those guidelines and standards have been based on in­
formation generated initially by water quality monitoring studies for FIB
and more recently by epidemiologic studies. In 2012, the EPA’s Recre­
ational Water Quality Criteria (RWQC) provided updated guidance on
recommended bacterial indicators levels in typical effluent standards to
minimize exposure of the public to harmful levels of pathogens. The
8



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Recently, QMRA methods have been applied to develop a potential
recreational water quality criterion value for coliphage (Boehm, 2019).
That study identified 60 PFU per 100 mL and 30 PFU per 100 mL, for
somatic and F+ coliphages respectively, as values that would provide
comparable public health protections by U.S. EPA for bacterial in­
dicators. However, the study had important limitations because it
addressed only untreated sewage, which is not typical of most waste­
water discharges to regulated surface waters in the USA. Also, Boehm
(2019) related concentrations of infectious coliphages only to norovirus
gene copies and not infectious noroviruses or other viruses causing
gastrointestinal illness from recreational water exposures. Confirmation
of these estimates by more robust and comprehensive observational field
studies are needed. Nevertheless, it certainly is possible that the addition
of coliphage monitoring to existing bacterial monitoring will identify
elevated health risks from recreational water exposures. The extent to
which this can be done in a timely fashion without generating “false
alarms” is not known at this time, and more field studies are needed to
verify the reliability of coliphage monitoring and an indicator of human
health risk from recreational water exposures.

Murphy, 2020). Reynolds et al. (2008) and Wallender et al. (2014)
estimated that 30–34% of waterborne illness is associated with the
consumption of contaminated groundwater in the U.S. (Reynolds et al.,
2008; Wallender et al., 2014). When Wallender et al. (2014) reviewed
the 248 groundwater outbreaks between 1971 and 2009, 54.4% of the
outbreak had unknown etiology, with Hepatitis A virus causing 8.5% of
these. In 33.1% of outbreaks, groundwater was contaminated by
sewage, 6.2% of waterborne disease outbreaks were associated with
karst limestone bedrock and the improper designs, locations, and
maintenance of septic systems and wells were often implicated (Wal­
lender et al., 2014). Similarly, in Canada an estimated 45% of all
waterborne outbreaks involve non-municipal systems, largely in rural or
remote areas (Hynds et al., 2014). A review of waterborne disease out­
breaks in Canada between 1974 and 1996 highlighted that private
supplies only serve about 13% of Canada’s population but contribute
more than 20% of waterborne disease outbreaks that were associated
with private water supplies (Schuster et al., 2005). The contribution of
groundwater contamination in general and private well contamination
specifically is increasingly becoming a public health issue where the
need for increased viral monitoring requirements has been recom­
mended, especially given the propensity for viral transport in subsurface
flows when compared to larger bacteria that can be filtered out through
the soils.
A recent systematic analysis of groundwater outbreaks in the U.S.
and Canada found no correlation between viral presence and either total
coliforms or E. coli, the two most frequently employed fecal indicator
organisms for groundwater system surveillance (Hynds et al., 2014).
However, the review also was unable to associate coliphage detection
and viral presence. This corresponds with findings from several other
studies (Borchardt Mark A. et al., 2012; A. S. Ferguson et al., 2012; Locas
et al., 2008; Stokdyk et al., 2020). It is possible that coliphage moni­
toring may be of value in detecting fecally contaminated groundwater
that is not detected by fecal indicator bacteria. In a longitudinal study of
non-regulated groundwater wells in eastern North Carolina, E. coli
presence rare and total coliform frequency was relatively low (~20%).
However, male-specific and somatic coliphages were detectable in 66%
and 54% of samples, respectively (Stallard et al., 2021). Concentrations
of male-specific coliphages were higher than somatic coliphages, and
rainfall partly influenced higher coliphage concentrations in some sea­
sons. The European Union now recommends the use of somatic co­
liphages as potential; indicators of human enteric viruses in drinking
water (Lettieri et al., 2020). Some authors have suggested that the
limited value of indicators in predicting the presence of enteric viruses in
groundwater highlights the possible need for direct enteric viral detec­
tion at groundwater sources used for drinking water (Hynds et al.,
2014). Other applications for monitoring bacteriophages in surface
waters include determining whether waters in which bivalves are har­
vested have been contaminated with sewage (Hodgson et al., 2017). For
example, the National Shellfish Sanitation Program, a cooperative pro­
gram recognized by the Food and Drug Administration, recommends the
use of male specific coliphages for the control of Molluscan shellfish
(NSSP, 2019).

3.2. Drinking water, groundwater, and de-facto reuse
Monitoring drinking water sources and further upstream tributaries
for evidence of fecal pollution is challenging, due to the contributions
from point and non-point sources and the large area of some watersheds.
Levels of the bacterial indicator E. coli in downstream receiving waters
have been found to be inversely correlated with stream order (a metric
of flow and complexity) and watershed area (Rafi et al., 2018), likely
due at least in part to dilution and the larger watershed area of higher
order waters. This suggests that microbial risk can be higher further
upstream where wastewater effluent is a greater percentage of the total
river flow and vice versa for water stream further downstream. In
agreement with this, microbial risk assessment modeling has indicated
de facto reuse scenarios can exceed risk benchmarks (10− 4 infections)
primarily due to variations in source water quality (Bailey et al., 2020;
Chaudhry et al., 2017; Lim et al., 2017; Nappier et al., 2018; Soller et al.,
2019).
Drinking water outbreaks are reported in the literature, especially
after extreme precipitation and flooding events (Andrade et al., 2018;
Cann et al., 2013; Charron et al., 2004; Dura et al., 2010; Exum et al.,
2018). A review by Cann et al. (2013) investigating waterborne out­
breaks from 1910 to 2010 identified 87 outbreaks involving extreme
water-related weather events, where heavy rainfall (55.2%) and flood­
ing (52.9%) were the most common events preceding outbreaks (Cann
et al., 2013). Outbreaks following extreme water-related weather events
were often the result of contamination of the drinking-water supply
(53.7%) and were mainly caused by Vibrio (21.6%) and Leptospira
(12.7%). Viruses were implicated in 25.7% of these outbreaks. Similarly,
a review of drinking water outbreaks in the US between 1971 and 2006
by Craun et al. (2010) reported the occurrence of 833 waterborne dis­
ease outbreaks resulting in 577,991 cases of illness, and 106 deaths, 64
of which were associated with a viral infectious agent. Of the 64 viral
outbreaks, 34 cases were attributed to norovirus and 29 cases were
attributed to Hepatitis A, with rotavirus causing one outbreak. Two
hundred and sixty-four of these outbreaks were associated with no or
inadequate treatment of the surface or groundwater drinking water
source (Craun et al., 2010).
Waterborne disease outbreaks associated with the microbial
contamination of groundwater by anthropogenic activities (urban, in­
dustrial, and agricultural) through direct discharge, insufficiently
treated wastewater, leaking sewage, and septic systems have been
recently reported (Andrade et al., 2018; De Giglio et al., 2017; Mattioli
et al., 2021; Stokdyk et al., 2020). Forty-four percent of the US popu­
lation rely on groundwater as a drinking water source (Kistemann et al.,
2002), with 12–14% of the U.S. and Canadian populations drinking
federally-unregulated, private well water (Hynds et al., 2014; D. Lee and

3.3. Agriculture and irrigation
Groundwater and surface water contamination with viruses can
often have additional public health implications. Viral infections are the
leading cause of foodborne gastroenteritis globally and in Europe with
norovirus and hepatitis A causing a significant portion of the outbreaks
(Gossner and Severi, 2014; Lowther et al., 2019). Most regions cannot
use municipally-treated drinking water for irrigation due to cost and
accessibility. Thus, rainwater, groundwater, surface water and raw or
treated or partially-treated wastewater are some of the most commonly
used irrigation waters (Uyttendaele et al., 2015). The World Health
Organization has developed guidelines for the safe use of wastewater,
excreta and greywater for agriculture irrigation, with an emphasis on
9



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Table 2
Logistical and methodological advantages and disadvantages of bacteriophage analyses versus bacterial indicator analysis.
Advantages

Disadvantages

• Persist longer at lower temperatures and in freshwater as compared to marine waters
(McMinn et al., 2020).
• Samples can be kept at 4 ◦ C for at least 48 h without any significant changes in number
of infectious bacteriophages (Mendez et al., 2002).
• A small sample volume can preserve its phage densities for months when frozen at − 20
or - 80 ◦ C with the addition of 10% glycerol (Mooijman et al., 2005).
• Can be detected in as little as 6 h (Jofre et al., 2016).
• Stress and injury, which result in the bacterial viable but non-culturable state and
misrepresentation of bacterial densities, are not concepts that apply to bacteriophages
(Jofre et al., 2016).
• Somatic coliphages are less sensitive to environmental factors than thermotolerant
coliforms in river water (Skraber et al., 2004).
• Bacteriophages can mainly only replicate inside the susceptible host. Replication
outside the host is considered negligible.
• All these methods can be applied in routine microbiology laboratories without the need
for extra equipment or specialized expertise (Jofre et al., 2016).
• SAL and DAL formats cannot be automated or semi-automated for high throughput
(Rajnovic et al., 2019).

• Somatic coliphages are typically present in surface waters at levels that are
approximately an order of magnitude lower than E. coli and are also lower than
enterococci, with concentrations of F- specific coliphages being even lower (Grabow,
2001; USEPA, 2016).
• Concentration methods are available now (e.g., US EPA Method 1642) but are still
more laborious than direct use of a grab sample.
• The cost of detecting F-specific RNA bacteriophages is higher than detecting FIB at
utilities and requires more staff time for additional prep and handling. Some
commercial labs charge 15–300% more for coliphage testing compared to FIB testing.
• Viruses are not as easily cultured as bacteria. The complexity and cost are deterrents to
adoption by industry (Rajnovic et al., 2019).
• Scientific consensus needed on which coliphage to choose, somatic or F-specific
coliphage, and what host to use
• Monitoring in warm waters needs to be carefully considered. Bacteriophage survival
decreases at temperatures above 15 ◦ C compared to 4 ◦ C (Skraber et al., 2009a,b) and
F-specific RNA bacteriophages occurring in secondary effluents are significantly more
sensitive to temperatures ranging from 25 ◦ C to 40 ◦ C compared to E. coli and somatic
coliphages (Agulló-Barceló et al., 2013).
• Variable presence of these phages in animal populations
• In some countries (e.g., Canada) laboratories would have to obtain a license for
Containment Level 2 to handle coliphages and host cells.

minimizing pathogen risks (Chang et al., 2006). While microbial
contamination risks of wastewater irrigation are well-known, the
perception remains that ground and surface water are high quality and
safe to use. As can be seen in Tables SI–1, both can be impacted by
discharges of treated (or untreated) human wastewater (De Giglio et al.,
2017). This practice, in combination with food chain globalization, has
resulted in a large number of documented foodborne outbreaks that
have been linked to irrigation with contaminated water or untreated
wastewater (Adegoke et al., 2018; Bernard et al., 2014; De Giglio et al.,
2017; Ethelberg et al., 2010; Falkenhorst et al., 2005; Sano et al., 2016).
Fresh produce and especially soft berries are food items that are
considered to be at high risk to be contaminated with norovirus (Bernard
et al., 2014; Uyttendaele et al., 2015). It is important to note here that
human viruses can contaminate food either through contamination at
the source or in association with food processing through inadequate
hygiene practices of operatives or systems, with person-to-person
transmission being more common. When food is contaminated prior to
processing, sewage pollution of the environment is the principal
contributing factor through irrigation waters or land application prac­
tices. Given the impacts of climate change and water scarcity in arid
regions (e.g., Australia, India, Pakistan, Vietnam, northern China, the
Middle East), an increase in the use of wastewater for irrigation is
anticipated (Sano et al., 2016). Thus, identifying potential improve­
ments in monitoring irrigation water could be beneficial.
In addition, the reuse of biosolids in agricultural applications is
common across the U.S. Though there are site and access restrictions
with Class B biosolids, it provides for a level of uncertainty with regard
to viral exposures (Brooks et al., 2012; Chetochine et al., 2006). There
are currently no approved viral indicator organisms for viral monitoring
at the federal level. Enteric viruses and helminth eggs are used as a
measure of the effectiveness of Class A disinfection processes. The
problem with utilizing Ascaris eggs and poliovirus for spike studies in
assessing Class A disinfection is that it requires obtaining a viable and
stable spike at densities of 103 to 105 per gram dry weight which carries
its own risks. Furthermore, with the global effort to completely eradicate
poliovirus, these viruses are no longer recommended for either labora­
tory or field use and are scheduled for destruction or confiscation from
laboratories throughout the world, except for officially designated
reference laboratories (Zambon and Martin, 2018).
The adoption of improved indicator organisms for biosolids, many of
which are indigenous to the biosolids matrix, would provide greater
resolution on pathogen risk in biosolids processing, land application,
and disposal. Currently, there are three organisms that have historical

data in this category: Aerobic endospores, somatic bacteriophage (Smith
et al., 2005) and Clostridium perfringens (Karpowicz et al., 2010). These
organisms are found in biosolids at approximately 105 per gram dry
solids. In contrast to the existing methods for quantifying enteric viruses,
assays for these indicator organisms take days instead of between 3 and
6 weeks (Smith et al., 2005). The use of C. perfringens as an indicator has
been noted to have a potential to assess both Class A and B disinfection
and would be effective in denoting the origin of municipal biosolids
(Stelma, 2018). In the spore-forming bacteria group, aerobic endospores
may be found in high densities in sludge (103 to 105 organisms per gram
dry weight) (Pillai et al., 2011). These organisms have been observed to
be slightly more resistant than Clostridium perfringens and have been
utilized in monitoring alkaline disinfection processes. Recently, guide­
lines and standards have been established for determining the log10
microbial reductions and end-product (treated) effluents and solids re­
siduals concentrations for performance of commercially available sani­
tation systems that seek approval by the International Standards
Organization (ISO) and the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI). For virus reduction performance and treated residual liquids and
solids concentrations somatic and male coliphages are specified for both
lab and field testing according the a standard testing protocol for cer­
tification (International Organization for Standardization, 2018).
Poliovirus spikes continue to be utilized to test process efficacy, but
work at Tulane has noted that somatic bacteriophages are in the range of
103 to 106 per gram dry weight in untreated sludge. Monitoring the
poliovirus spike and the somatic bacteriophages during alkaline treat­
ment has found the bacteriophages to be slightly more resistant. Though
the bacteriophage exhibiting greater resistance to stressors in typical
treatment processes than poliovirus is not new information (Cramer
et al., 1983; Lasobras et al., 1999; Mocé-Llivina et al., 2003), coliphages
are considered a conservative viral indicator and due to their treatment
resistance and high concentrations in wastewater, coliphages allow for
verification of larger ranges of viral pathogen inactivation (Martín-Díaz
et al., 2020; Nappier et al., 2006).
4. Challenges, knowledge gaps, and future directions
4.1. Impacts of limited etiological understanding
Understandably, estimating the true etiology and burden of water­
borne illnesses and its impacts on any economy is difficult since not all
waterborne illnesses are reported and the exact number of illnesses per
year is unknown. In addition, the degree to which this data is
10



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

after 10–12 h.
The methods categorized as rapid are based on the detection of ge­
netic sequences or on immunological tests of the viral proteins. They
generally require different and moderately sophisticated and costlier
instrumentation and training for deployment. They are deployed in only
a very limited number of municipal and public health laboratories and
are therefore currently less accessible to the average municipal labora­
tory. The common characteristics of the genetic sequence-based
methods are that positive results are not indicative of infectivity, and
some are not quantitative.
Researcher and biotech companies have been exploring other options
for faster, simpler and more effective analysis of coliphages for years.
Ideally, the development of a method similar to the speed and ease of
Colilert™, which is used for the detection of FIB, would help industry
adopt coliphages as indicators of microbiological water quality. Various
groups have focused on utilizing the phage-induced release of various
compounds from host E. coli cells, including beta-galactosidase (Ijzerman
and Hagedorn, 1992; Stanek and Falkinham, 2001), bioluminescent
adenylate kinase and adenosine triphosphate (Guzmán Luna et al., 2009).
Currently, the FastPhage F+ test derived from Method 1601, is rapid, not
culture based, and enzymatic based (Charm Sciences, Inc., 2015). Mar­
keted under the BluePhage label, allow for the analyses of somatic co­
liphages in conformance with ISO 10705-2 and EPA Method 1602 and are
designed for testing recreational and drinking water, as well as shellfish
extracts, sediments and sludge extracts (Muniesa et al., 2018; Tor­
ibio-Avedillo et al., 2020). EasyPhage is a rapid coliphage plaque assay
method using a pectin-based medium that avoids the need to use agar that
must be autoclaved or boiled. One simply combines the water sample,
medium and E. coli host, pours the mixture into a plate containing a
chemical catalyst that hardens the mixture within minutes, followed by
incubation for plaque formation (Mapp et al., 2016). Some authors have
explored using optical density measurements for the quantification of
bacteriophages (Rajnovic et al., 2019). Rames and Macdonald (2019)
developed a colorimetric assay using a cellulose absorbent pad material
that replaces the use of agar for coliphage growth and enables the detec­
tion of somatic coliphages in 1.5–2 h and F-specific coliphages in 2.5–3 h.
A comparison of FIB and coliphage monitoring is provided in Table 3.

underreported is unknown (Schuster et al., 2005). Not all illnesses are
linked to a common transmission source, so many outbreaks go unde­
tected (CDC, 2019). Most outbreaks have mixed etiology with multiple
causative infectious agents and not all possible infectious agents are
identified (Figueras and Borrego, 2010). Similar observations have been
made in Canada, where multiple preventative public health policies
have been recommended in the absence of a clear understanding of
waterborne disease causes to reduce public health risks (e.g., recrea­
tional beach advisories, recreational water inspection) (Canada Health,
2021; Janicki et al., 2018). Nevertheless, although the true societal
economic burden of viral exposure is unknown, increased adoption of
viral indicators can provide an improved understanding of where viral
pathogen risk is greatest and lowest and allow for targeted treatment to
meet the desired level of risk.
4.2. Methodological challenges
When evaluating the use of coliphages for monitoring purposes,
various benefits and challenges of adoption have been outlined in the
literature. A summary of some of these have been highlighted in Table 2.
Overall, it has been noted (Jofre et al., 2016) somatic coliphages are
more prevalent than F-specific coliphages. Exceptions to this include
scenarios such as reclaimed water (primarily due to UV) (Montemayor
et al., 2008), aquifer-based groundwater (Lucena et al., 2006) and
clayey freshwater sediments (Skraber et al., 2009a,b). Methods for
detection of both bacteriophage groups simultaneously has been inves­
tigated with some success (Bailey et al., 2017; Blanch et al., 2020;
Guzmán et al., 2008).
Culture based methods rely upon the incubation of suspect samples
with appropriate and susceptible host bacteria strains to produce
quantifiable plaques for enumeration in agar media or quantal results
for Most Probable Number estimates of concentration in liquid cultures.
Successful analyses by these methods require the coliphage:host ratios to
be in the infective dose range, and for the host bacteria to be in the
appropriate growth phase. Once these requirements are met, the plated
mixture requires appropriate incubation conditions for experimental
success, and the data can typically be acquired through visualization
Table 3
Considerations for FIB versus coliphages for monitoring purposes.
Consideration

Fecal indicator bacteria

Coliphages

Require sampling large volumes
(1–1000 L) for detection

No. 100 mL grab sample is sufficient for analysis

Require sample concentration

No. Sample can be used directly.

Detection is possible in less than 24
h

Possible but tests producing results in 18 h do not produce reliable
results for wastewater and ambient water samples (Chao, 2006;
Nilsen et al., 2019; Warden et al., 2011)
Low
Present when fecal pathogens are present, but may also be present
in non-fecally contaminated ambient water.
No

Yes. In most cases it will be necessary to analyze 1 L samples/coliphage
target; however, this may not be the case for all advanced treatment
wastewater effluents.
Yes. Standard EPA Methods required the use of 100 mL sample
volumes. Thus, dead-end ultrafiltration (UF) is used to concentrate the
larger sample volumes (2 L) required for recreational water monitoring
(final volume 200 mL).
Yes

Cost
Association with fecal
contamination
Surrogate for viral pathogens in
wastewater
Present in greater numbers than the
pathogen (in this case, human
viruses)
Equally resistant as viruses to
environmental factors and
wastewater treatment
Do not multiply in environment
Association with viral illness
Potential for automation
Risk to analyst
Availability of QA/QC and reference
material
Requires additional laboratory
licensing

Medium
Present when fecal pathogens are present, but is likely absent in nonfecally contaminated ambient water.
Yes

Depends on source

In most cases

No

Under most circumstances

No
Some
Yes
Low
Yes

Not likely
Some
No
Low
Some

No, not if IDEXX style testing being used

In some countries

11



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

4.3. Additional challenges for adoption

(Haramoto et al., 2018). For E. coli, various freeze-dried options
confirmed by flow cytometry are available. That format is helpful for
routine QA/QC practices to maintain laboratory accreditation and
for troubleshooting when methodological challenges are
encountered.
• Interpretation and analysis of left-biased data and non-detects to
assess true risk is needed. Sano et al. (2016) and others have pointed
out that the common practice of substitution of non-detect data with
specific values (e.g., the limit of quantification, half value of quan­
tification limit or zero) gives inaccurate estimation of distribution
parameters for microbiological contaminants and that a Bayesian
estimation of the posterior predictive distribution of pollutant con­
centrations in environmental samples may be more appropriate
when looking at log removals and treatment efficacy. More attention
needs to be paid to this part of monitoring, reporting, and managing
viral risk (Haramoto et al., 2018; Poma et al., 2019).
• There is a need to provide specific guidance on result interpretation
and risk management practices when FIB and coliphage data tested
in parallel provide contradictory results during the monitoring of
water, food, and beaches.
• Timely efforts need to accompany outbreak source identification or
confirmation with bacteriophage testing during waterborne disease
outbreaks investigations to assess more clearly the relationship be­
tween coliphage detection and illness. While the assessment of
human and other animal(dog, pig, bovine, avian) microbial source
tracking (MST) markers allows the identification of fecal contribu­
tion sources (Ahmed et al., 2021; Mattioli et al., 2021; McKee et al.,
2020; Nguyen et al., 2018; Sinigalliano et al., 2021; Stokdyk et al.,
2020; Vadde et al., 2019) and can provide evidence of the wide
spread effects of treated and untreated wastewater contamination of
other water bodies that may not seem connected, these results do not
provide or translate into coliphage monitoring evidence directly.
• An industry wide assessment of the potential implications of
applying coliphage monitoring from a plant upgrade perspective that
would be required to meet new regulations is recommended.
Comparing this option to other public health protection alternatives
in different areas should be explored.
• The incorporation of coliphage monitoring results into larger man­
agement frameworks should be facilitated, such as water safety as­
sessments, sanitary surveys and HACCP (Ercumen et al., 2017;
Leifert et al., 2008), especially after extreme rainfall events and
flooding (García-Aljaro et al., 2017). Phased approaches should be
used that are designed locally and can be scale up if need be.

Some authors have reported that utility organizational culture and
complacency is a hindrance for the adoption of policies and procedures
to protect public health in the absence of financial incentives (Amjad
et al., 2016; Kot et al., 2014). In the United States, the individual states
develop their own water quality standards and choose analytical
methods, for approval by the EPA. Regulations and permits reflect
standards and allowable limits for contaminant levels rather than pre­
venting contamination in each water system (Amjad et al., 2016).
Meanwhile, system-specific risks exist and sporadic outbreaks in
developed nations continue to occur (Hrudey and Hrudey, 2007, 2019).
Because these risks are different depending on the water system, the
development of locally relevant risk evaluation approaches becomes
critical. Ideally, it would include identifying specific hazards and risks
for each water system in addition to meeting national guidelines and
regulations (Ashbolt et al., 2015; Schmiege et al., 2020). This reiterates
the importance of an overarching regulatory monitoring approach that
is initially developed and managed at a more local or watershed level
before being scaled up to ensure relevance and avoid potential dupli­
cation (Amjad et al., 2016).
A recent study examining risk evaluation and management ap­
proaches for drinking water reported that drinking water utilities
questioned the relative benefits of quantitative versus qualitative risk
assessment and prioritization methods. The study cited that many util­
ities preferred the more streamlined, simple approach as it was easier to
implement and required less staffing (Setty et al., 2019). This is espe­
cially relevant for small and rural systems (50-5000 inhabitants), which
would also need support with training, implementation, external
stakeholder identification and interpretation of results especially given
their limited resources and access to experts (Schmiege et al., 2020). For
water source protection plans, Sham et al. (2015) recommended the
development of a U.S. CDC process to assess existing source water pro­
tection efforts and tailor programming to the goals of individual utilities.
They also recommended adopting a phased approach to aid adoption
(Sham et al., 2015). Utilities often highlight that the starting the con­
versation about proactive monitoring or watershed protection programs
require improved communication and framing of the benefits and
desired outcomes, such as the common desire of protecting the health of
employees, residents, and their families (Setty et al., 2019; Summerill
et al., 2010). In the context of water resource risk management tools,
participating utilities identified the need for: connectivity among a
supportive network or group to allow information exchange, and guid­
ance for the personnel and human resource aspects critical to the success
of risk management approaches.

5. Conclusions

4.4. Future directions

The consensus of the scientific community suggests that using bac­
terial indicators does not address the risk posed by viral pathogens,
mainly because the fate and transport of viral pathogens differs from
that of bacterial pathogens, due to differences in size and other prop­
erties, lack of metabolic overhead for biological survival, persistence in
the environment, and increased transportability compared to bacterial
pathogens. These problems are further compounded by the variable
wastewater treatment systems and mechanisms employed and the
impact of these differences on the survival of viral indicators when
compared bacterial indicators. For example, non-nitrifying facilities
with chlorine disinfection may allow for increased survival of viruses as
compared to facilities with tertiary treatment and UV or ozone
disinfection.
Research suggests that these risks are not distributed uniformly, due
to differences in site location and the impact or lack thereof of dilution
when discharging into surface water. Site-specific criteria may be more
appropriate to maximize the positive impacts on public health and pri­
oritize process upgrades in areas in which the risk of viral exposure is
highest. Furthermore, the low infectious doses of viruses and the dif­
ferences in viral fate and transport compared to bacteria also drive the

Given the status of coliphage testing and epidemiological evidence
related to viral waterborne disease outbreaks, it is possible that coli­
phage monitoring could reduce illness and public health risk, as the
benefits of the One Water approach could be comprehensive, coordi­
nated and cumulative. However, additional evidence and data needs to
be collected to confirm the following:
• Future epidemiological studies should specifically include co­
liphages as measured virus indicators (USEPA, 2016).
• Developing more guidance on how coliphage data can be used for
risk monitoring and risk prioritization, while integrating cost con­
siderations is necessary (Amjad et al., 2016; Setty et al., 2019).
• The potential use of new coliphage testing methods for all relevant
matrices is recommended, including the identification of critical
variables that would impact result reliability and reproducibility.
• While sample collection and concentration approaches are becoming
more standardized, introduction of easy-to-use QA/QC products to
quantitatively assess coliphage recovery in matrix spikes is needed
12



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

risk in de facto reuse and potable reuse. Monitoring of viral indicators,
specifically coliphages, would allow for stakeholders to make better
informed decisions but we must address the outstanding knowledge gaps
and implementation challenges through additional research.

recreational waters: pooled analysis of six coastal beach cohorts. Epidemiology 28
(5), 644–652. https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000681.
Bernard, H., Faber, M., Wilking, H., Haller, S., Höhle, M., Schielke, A., Ducomble, T.,
Siffczyk, C., Merbecks, S.S., Fricke, G., Hamouda, O., Stark, K., Werber, D., Outbreak
Investigation Team, 2014. Large multistate outbreak of norovirus gastroenteritis
associated with frozen strawberries, Germany, 2012. Euro Surveill.: Bulletin
Europeen Sur Les Maladies Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease
Bulletin 19 (8), 20719. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.8.20719.
Bertrand, I., Schijven, J.F., Sánchez, G., Wyn-Jones, P., Ottoson, J., Morin, T.,
Muscillo, M., Verani, M., Nasser, A., Husman, A.M. de R., Myrmel, M., Sellwood, J.,
Cook, N., Gantzer, C., 2012. The impact of temperature on the inactivation of enteric
viruses in food and water: a review. J. Appl. Microbiol. 112 (6), 1059–1074. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05267.x.
Blanch, A.R., Lucena, F., Muniesa, M., Jofre, J., 2020. Fast and easy methods for the
detection of coliphages. J. Microbiol. Methods 173, 105940. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.mimet.2020.105940.
Blatchley, E.R., Gong, W.-L., Alleman, J.E., Rose, J.B., Huffman, D.E., Otaki, M., Lisle, J.
T., 2007. Effects of wastewater disinfection on waterborne bacteria and viruses.
Water Environ. Res. 79 (1), 81–92. https://doi.org/10.2175/106143006X102024.
Boehm, A.B., 2019. Risk-based water quality thresholds for coliphages in surface waters:
effect of temperature and contamination aging. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 21
(12), 2031–2041. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EM00376B.
Boehm, A.B., Silverman, A.I., Schriewer, A., Goodwin, K., 2019. Systematic review and
meta-analysis of decay rates of waterborne mammalian viruses and coliphages in
surface waters. Water Res. 164, 114898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2019.114898.
Bonde, G., 1963. Bacterial Indicators of Water Pollution. Teknisk Forlag, Copenhagen,
pp. 221–226.
Bonde, G., 1966. Bacteriological methods for estimation of water pollution. Health Lab.
Sci. 3, 124–128.
Bonde, G., 1975. Bacteria indicators of sewage pollution. In: Discharge of Sewage from
Sea Outfalls: Proceedings of an International Symposium, pp. 37–47.
Borchardt Mark, A., Spencer Susan, K., Kieke Burney, A., Elisabetta, Lambertini, Loge
Frank, J., 2012. Viruses in nondisinfected drinking water from municipal wells and
community incidence of acute gastrointestinal illness. Environ. Health Perspect. 120
(9), 1272–1279. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104499.
Brooks, J.P., McLaughlin, M.R., Gerba, C.P., Pepper, I.L., 2012. Land application of
manure and Class B biosolids: an occupational and public quantitative microbial risk
assessment. J. Environ. Qual. 41 (6), 2009–2023. https://doi.org/10.2134/
jeq2011.0430.
Byappanahalli, M.N., Nevers, M.B., Korajkic, A., Staley, Z.R., Harwood, V.J., 2012.
Enterococci in the environment. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.: MMBR 76 (4), 685–706.
https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.00023-12.
Calci, K.R., Burkhardt, W., Watkins, W.D., Rippey, S.R., 1998. Occurrence of malespecific bacteriophage in feral and domestic animal wastes, human feces, and
human-associated wastewaters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64 (12), 5027–5029.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.64.12.5027-5029.1998.
Canada Health, 2021. Guidelines for Canadian recreational water quality: physical,
aesthetic and chemical characteristics, 20. https://www.canada.ca/content/da
m/canada/health-canada/migration/healthy-canadians/publications/healthy-livin
g-vie-saine/water-recreational-recreative-eau/alt/pdf/water-recreational-recreati
ve-eau-eng.pdf.
Cann, K.F., Thomas, D.R., Salmon, R.L., Wyn-Jones, A.P., Kay, D., 2013. Extreme waterrelated weather events and waterborne disease. Epidemiol. Infect. 141 (4), 671–686.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268812001653.
CDC, 2019, April 25. Interpreting waterborne disease outbreak data. https://www.cdc.
gov/healthywater/surveillance/interpreting-data.html.
Chang, A., Pan, G., Asano, T., Buechler, S., Devi, G., Petterson, S., Ashbolt, N.,
Schönning, C., Schwartzbrod, L., 2006. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater,
Excreta and Greywater:, vol. II. World Health Organization.
Chao, W.L., 2006. Evaluation of Colilert-18 for the detection of coliforms and Escherichia
coli in tropical fresh water. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 42 (2), 115–120. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1472-765X.2005.01814.x.
Characklis, G.W., Dilts, M.J., Iii, O.D.S., Likirdopulos, C.A., Krometis, L.-A.H., Sobsey, M.
D., 2005. Microbial partitioning to settleable particles in stormwater. Water Res. vol.
11.
Charm Sciences, Inc, 2015. Charm fast phage test for fecal indicator in drinking water
(MRK-114-004 feb-2015). http://www.charm.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
MRK-114.pdf.
Charron, D., Thomas, M., Waltner-Toews, D., Aramini, J., Edge, T., Kent, R., Maarouf, A.,
Wilson, J., 2004. Vulnerability of waterborne diseases to climate change in Canada:
a review. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A 67 (20–22), 1667–1677. https://doi.org/
10.1080/15287390490492313.
Chaudhry, R., Hamilton, K., Haas, C., Nelson, K., 2017. Drivers of microbial risk for
direct potable reuse and de Facto reuse treatment Schemes: the impacts of source
water quality and blending. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 14 (6), 635. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14060635.
Chetochine, A.S., Brusseau, M.L., Gerba, C.P., Pepper, I.L., 2006. Leaching of phage from
class B biosolids and potential transport through soil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72
(1), 665–671. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.72.1.665-671.2006.
Chhetri, B.K., Galanis, E., Sobie, S., Brubacher, J., Balshaw, R., Otterstatter, M., Mak, S.,
Lem, M., Lysyshyn, M., Murdock, T., Fleury, M., Zickfeld, K., Zubel, M., Clarkson, L.,
Takaro, T.K., 2019. Projected local rain events due to climate change and the
impacts on waterborne diseases in Vancouver, British Columbia. Environ. Health 18,
116. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-019-0550-y.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2022.113921.
References
Abdelzaher, A.M., Wright, M.E., Ortega, C., Hasan, A.R., Shibata, T., Solo-Gabriele, H.M.,
Kish, J., Withum, K., He, G., Elmir, S.M., Bonilla, J.A., Bonilla, T.D., Palmer, C.J.,
Scott, T.M., Lukasik, J., Harwood, V.J., McQuaig, S., Sinigalliano, C.D., Gidley, M.L.,
Fleming, L.E., 2011. Daily measures of microbes and human health at a non-point
source marine beach. J. Water Health 9 (3), 443–457. https://doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2011.146.
Adam, E.A., Collier, S.A., Fullerton, K.E., Gargano, J.W., Beach, M.J., 2017. Prevalence
and direct costs of emergency department visits and hospitalizations for selected
diseases that can be transmitted by water, United States. J. Water Health 15 (5),
673–683. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2017.083.
Adegoke, A.A., Amoah, I.D., Stenström, T.A., Verbyla, M.E., Mihelcic, J.R., 2018.
Epidemiological evidence and health risks associated with agricultural reuse of
partially treated and untreated wastewater: a review. Front. Public Health 6, 337.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2018.00337.
Agulló-Barceló, M., Polo-López, M.I., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., Fernández-Ibáñez, P., 2013.
Solar Advanced Oxidation Processes as disinfection tertiary treatments for real
wastewater: implications for water reclamation. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 136–137,
341–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2013.01.069.
Ahmed, W., Tscharke, B., Bertsch, P.M., Bibby, K., Bivins, A., Choi, P., Clarke, L.,
Dwyer, J., Edson, J., Nguyen, T.M.H., O’Brien, J.W., Simpson, S.L., Sherman, P.,
Thomas, K.V., Verhagen, R., Zaugg, J., Mueller, J.F., 2021. SARS-CoV-2 RNA
monitoring in wastewater as a potential early warning system for COVID-19
transmission in the community: a temporal case study. Sci. Total Environ. 761,
144216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144216.
Amjad, U.Q., Luh, J., Baum, R., Bartram, J., 2016. Water safety plans: bridges and
barriers to implementation in North Carolina. J. Water Health 14 (5), 816–826.
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2016.011.
Andrade, L., O’Dwyer, J., O’Neill, E., Hynds, P., 2018. Surface water flooding,
groundwater contamination, and enteric disease in developed countries: a scoping
review of connections and consequences. Environ. Pollut. 236, 540–549. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.01.104.
Ashbolt, N.J., Grabow, W., Snozzi, M., 2015. Environmental (Saprozoic) pathogens of
engineered water systems: understanding their ecology for risk assessment and
management. In: Water Quality: Guidelines, Standards and Health, vol. 4. World
Health Organization, pp. 289–316. No. 2. https://www.mdpi.com/2076-081
7/4/2/390.
Aw, T.G., Gin, K.Y.-H., 2010. Environmental surveillance and molecular characterization
of human enteric viruses in tropical urban wastewaters. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109 (2),
716–730. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2010.04701.x.
Azadpour-Keeley, A., Faulkner, B., Chen, J.-S., 2003. Movement and Longevity of Viruses
in the Subsurface (EPA/540/S-03/500; Water Issues, P. 25). USEPA National Risk
Management Research Laboratory.
Azuaga, M.J., Munoz, J., Gonzalez, F., Arias, J.M., 1990. Isolation and characterization
of bacteriophages from Myxococcus virescens. In: Isolation and Characterization of
Bacteriophages from Myxococcus Virescens, 61, pp. 83–88, 247.
Bailey, E.S., Price, M., Casanova, L.M., Sobsey, M.D., 2017. E. coli CB390: an alternative
E. coli host for simultaneous detection of somatic and F+ coliphage viruses in
reclaimed and other waters. J. Virol Methods 250, 25–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jviromet.2017.09.016.
Bailey, E.S., Casanova, L.M., Simmons, O.D., Sobsey, M.D., 2018. Tertiary treatment and
dual disinfection to improve microbial quality of reclaimed water for potable and
non-potable reuse: a case study of facilities in North Carolina. Sci. Total Environ.
630, 379–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.02.239.
Bailey, E.S., Casanova, L.M., Sobsey, M.D., 2019. Effects of environmental storage
conditions on survival of indicator organisms in a blend of surface water and dual
disinfected reclaimed water. J. Appl. Microbiol. 126 (3), 985–994. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jam.14186.
Bailey, E.S., Casanova, L.M., Sobsey, M.D., 2020. Quantitative microbial risk assessment
of North Carolina reclaimed water for potable reuse. AWWA Water Sci. 2 (5), e1200
https://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1200.
Bales, R.C., Hinkle, S.R., Kroeger, T.W., Stocking, K., Gerba, C.P., 1991. Bacteriophage
adsorption during transport through porous media: chemical perturbations and
reversibility. Environ. Sci. Technol. 25 (12), 2088–2095. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es00024a016.
Ballesté, E., Blanch, A.R., Mendez, J., Sala-Comorera, L., Maunula, L., Monteiro, S.,
Farnleitner, A.H., Tiehm, A., Jofre, J., García-Aljaro, C., 2021. Bacteriophages are
good estimators of human viruses present in water. Front. Microbiol. 12, 973.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.619495.
Benjamin-Chung, J., Arnold, B.F., Wade, T.J., Schiff, K., Griffith, J.F., Dufour, A.P.,
Weisberg, S.B., Colford, J.M., 2017. Coliphages and gastrointestinal illness in

13



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Colford, J.M., Wade, T.J., Schiff, K.C., Wright, C.C., Griffith, J.F., Sandhu, S.K., Burns, S.,
Sobsey, M., Lovelace, G., Weisberg, S.B., 2007. Water quality indicators and the risk
of illness at beaches with nonpoint sources of fecal contamination. Epidemiology 18
(1), 27–35. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ede.0000249425.32990.b9.
Collier, S.A., Deng, L., Adam, E.A., Benedict, K.M., Beshearse, E.M., Blackstock, A.J.,
Bruce, B.B., Derado, G., Edens, C., Fullerton, K.E., Gargano, J.W., Geissler, A.L.,
Hall, A.J., Havelaar, A.H., Hill, V.R., Hoekstra, R.M., Reddy, S.C., Scallan, E.,
Stokes, E.K., Beach, M.J., 2021. Estimate of burden and direct healthcare cost of
infectious waterborne disease in the United States. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 27 (1),
140–149. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2701.190676.
Cramer, W.N., Burge, W.D., Kawata, K., 1983. Kinetics of virus inactivation by ammonia.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 45 (3), 760–765. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.45.3.760765.1983.
Craun, G.F., Brunkard, J.M., Yoder, J.S., Roberts, V.A., Carpenter, J., Wade, T.,
Calderon, R.L., Roberts, J.M., Beach, M.J., Roy, S.L., 2010. Causes of outbreaks
associated with drinking water in the United States from 1971 to 2006. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 23 (3), 507–528. https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00077-09.
Davies-Colley, R.J., Craggs, R.J., Park, J., Sukias, J.P.S., Nagels, J.W., Stott, R., 2005.
Virus removal in a pilot-scale ‘advanced’ pond system as indicated by somatic and FRNA bacteriophages. Water Sci. Technol. 51 (12), 107–110. https://doi.org/
10.2166/wst.2005.0440.
De Giglio, O., Caggiano, G., Bagordo, F., Barbuti, G., Brigida, S., Lugoli, F., Grassi, T., La
Rosa, G., Lucentini, L., Uricchio, V.F., De Donno, A., Montagna, M.T., 2017. Enteric
viruses and fecal bacteria indicators to assess groundwater quality and suitability for
irrigation. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 14 (6). https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph14060558.
de Jonge, P.A., Nobrega, F.L., Brouns, S.J.J., Dutilh, B.E., 2019. Molecular and
evolutionary determinants of bacteriophage host range. Trends Microbiol. 27 (1),
51–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2018.08.006.
DeFlorio-Barker, S., Wing, C., Jones, R.M., Dorevitch, S., 2018. Estimate of incidence and
cost of recreational waterborne illness on United States surface waters. Environ.
Health 17 (1), 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0347-9.
Deng, S., Yan, X., Zhu, Q., Liao, C., 2019. The utilization of reclaimed water: possible
risks arising from waterborne contaminants. Environ. Pollut. 254 (Pt A), 113020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113020.
DeNovio, N.M., Saiers, J.E., Ryan, J.N., 2004. Colloid movement in unsaturated porous
media: recent advances and future directions. Vadose Zone J. 3 (2), 338–351.
https://doi.org/10.2136/vzj2004.0338.
Derjaguin, B., Landau, L., 1941. Theory of the stability of strongly charged lyophobic sols
and of the adhesion of strongly charged particles in solutions of electrolytes.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0079-6816(93)90013-L.
Devane, M.L., Moriarty, E.M., Wood, D., Webster-Brown, J., Gilpin, B.J., 2014. The
impact of major earthquakes and subsequent sewage discharges on the microbial
quality of water and sediments in an urban river. Sci. Total Environ. 485–486,
666–680. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.03.027.
Dewey-Mattia, D., Roberts, V.A., Vieira, A., Fullerton, K.E., 2016. Foodborne
(1973–2013) and waterborne (1971–2013) disease outbreaks—United States.
MMWR 63 (55), 79–84. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6355a8. Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report.
Dias, E., Ebdon, J., Taylor, H., 2017. The application of bacteriophages as novel
indicators of viral pathogens in wastewater treatment systems. Water Res. 129
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.11.022.
Dika, C., Duval, J.F.L., Francius, G., Perrin, A., Gantzer, C., 2015. Isoelectric point is an
inadequate descriptor of MS2, Phi X 174 and PRD1 phages adhesion on abiotic
surfaces. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 446, 327–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcis.2014.08.055.
Dorevitch, S., DeFlorio-Barker, S., Jones, R.M., Liu, L., 2015. Water quality as a predictor
of gastrointestinal illness following incidental contact water recreation. Water Res.
83, 94–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.06.028.
Dorevitch, S., Anderson, K., Shrestha, A., Wright, D., Odhiambo, A., Oremo, J.,
Heimler, I., 2020. Solar powered microplasma-generated ozone: assessment of a
novel point-of-use drinking water treatment method. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ.
Health 17 (6). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17061858.
Dowd, S.E., Pillai, S.D., Wang, S., Corapcioglu, M.Y., 1998. Delineating the specific
influence of virus isoelectric point and size on virus adsorption and transport
through Sandy soils. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64 (2), 405–410.
Duckworth, D.H., 1976. Who discovered bacteriophage? Bacteriol. Rev. 40 (4), 793–802.
Dufour, A.P., 1984. Health Effects Criteria for Fresh Recreational Waters (EPA-600/1-84004; P. 42). USEPA, Toxicology and Microbiology Division, Cincinnati, OH.
Dura, G., Pándics, T., Kádár, M., Krisztalovics, K., Kiss, Z., Bodnár, J., Asztalos, A.,
Papp, E., 2010. Environmental health aspects of drinking water-borne outbreak due
to karst flooding: case study. J. Water Health 8 (3), 513–520. https://doi.org/
10.2166/wh.2010.099.
Ebdon, J.E., Sellwood, J., Shore, J., Taylor, H.D., 2012. Phages of Bacteroides (GB-124):
a novel tool for viral waterborne disease control? Environ. Sci. Technol. 46 (2),
1163–1169. https://doi.org/10.1021/es202874p.
Ebi, K.L., Balbus, J.M., Luber, G., Bole, A., Crimmins, A., Glass, G., Saha, S.,
Shimamoto, M.M., Trtanj, J., White-Newsome, J.L., 2018. Chapter 14: human
health. In: Fourth National Climate Assessment:, vol. II. U.S. Global Change Research
Program, Washington, DC, pp. 539–571. https://nca2018.globalchange.govhttps:
//nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/14.
Eftim, S.E., Hong, T., Soller, J., Boehm, A., Warren, I., Ichida, A., Nappier, S.P., 2017.
Occurrence of norovirus in raw sewage – a systematic literature review and metaanalysis. Water Res. 111, 366–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.01.017.
Ercumen, A., Naser, A.M., Arnold, B.F., Unicomb, L., Colford, J.M., Luby, S.P., 2017. Can
sanitary inspection surveys predict risk of microbiological contamination of

groundwater sources? Evidence from Shallow tubewells in rural Bangladesh. Am. J.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 96 (3), 561–568. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.16-0489.
Ethelberg, S., Lisby, M., Bottiger, B., Schultz, A.C., Villif, A., Jensen, T., Olsen, K.E.,
Scheutz, F., Kjelso, C., Muller, L., 2010. Outbreaks of gastroenteritis linked to lettuce,
Denmark, January 2010. Euro Surveill.: Bulletin Europeen Sur Les Maladies
Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease Bulletin 15 (6).
Exum, N.G., Betanzo, E., Schwab, K.J., Chen, T.Y.J., Guikema, S., Harvey, D.E., 2018.
Extreme precipitation, public health emergencies, and safe drinking water in the
USA. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 5 (2), 305–315. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572018-0200-5.
Falkenhorst, G., Krusell, L., Lisby, M., Madsen, S.B., Böttiger, B., Mølbak, K., 2005.
Imported frozen raspberries cause a series of norovirus outbreaks in Denmark, 2005.
Euro Surveill.: Bulletin Europeen Sur Les Maladies Transmissibles = European
Communicable Disease Bulletin 10 (9). https://doi.org/10.2807/esw.10.38.02795en. E050922.2.
Ferguson, C., Husman, A.M. de R., Altavilla, N., Deere, D., Ashbolt, N., 2003. Fate and
transport of surface water pathogens in watersheds. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol.
33 (3), 299–361. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643380390814497.
Ferguson, A.S., Layton, A.C., Mailloux, B.J., Culligan, P.J., Williams, D.E., Smartt, A.E.,
Sayler, G.S., Feighery, J., McKay, L.D., Knappett, P.S.K., Alexandrova, E., Arbit, T.,
Emch, M., Escamilla, V., Ahmed, K.M., Alam, M.J., Streatfield, P.K., Yunus, M., van
Geen, A., 2012. Comparison of fecal indicators with pathogenic bacteria and
rotavirus in groundwater. Sci. Total Environ. 431, 314–322. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.05.060.
Figueras, M.J., Borrego, J.J., 2010. New perspectives in monitoring drinking water
microbial quality. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 7 (12), 4179–4202. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph7124179.
Flannery, J., Keaveney, S., Rajko-Nenow, P., O’Flaherty, V., Doré, W., 2012.
Concentration of norovirus during wastewater treatment and its impact on oyster
contamination. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 (9), 3400–3406. https://doi.org/
10.1128/AEM.07569-11.
Francy, D.S., Stelzer, E.A., Bushon, R.N., Brady, A.M.G., Williston, A.G., Riddell, K.R.,
Borchardt, M.A., Spencer, S.K., Gellner, T.M., 2012. Comparative effectiveness of
membrane bioreactors, conventional secondary treatment, and chlorine and UV
disinfection to remove microorganisms from municipal wastewaters. Water Res. 46
(13), 4164–4178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.04.044.
Gaddad, S.M., Rodgi, S.S., 1987. The effect of temperature on the growth and
biochemical activities of Escherichia coli in sewage. Environ. Pollut. 43 (4),
313–321. https://doi.org/10.1016/0269-7491(87)90184-9.
García-Aljaro, C., Martín-Díaz, J., Viñas-Balada, E., Calero-Cáceres, W., Lucena, F.,
Blanch, A.R., 2017. Mobilisation of microbial indicators, microbial source tracking
markers and pathogens after rainfall events. Water Res. 112, 248–253. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.02.003.
Gerba, C.P., Keswick, B.H., 1981. Survival and transport of enteric viruses and bacteria in
groundwater. In: van Duijvenbooden, W., Glasbergen, P., van Lelyveld, H. (Eds.),
Studies in Environmental Science, vol. 17. Elsevier, pp. 511–515. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0166-1116(08)71944-7.
Gerba, C.P., Betancourt, W.Q., Kitajima, M., Rock, C.M., 2018. Reducing uncertainty in
estimating virus reduction by advanced water treatment processes. Water Res. 133,
282–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.01.044.
Gibson, K.E., 2014. Viral pathogens in water: occurrence, public health impact, and
available control strategies. Curr. Opin. Virol. 4, 50–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coviro.2013.12.005.
Gómez-Doñate, M., Payán, A., Cortés, I., Blanch, A.R., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., Muniesa, M.,
2011. Isolation of bacteriophage host strains of Bacteroides species suitable for
tracking sources of animal faecal pollution in water. Environ. Microbiol. 13 (6),
1622–1631. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02474.x.
Gossner, C.M., Severi, E., 2014. Three simultaneous, food-borne, multi-country
outbreaks of hepatitis A virus infection reported in EPIS-FWD in 2013: what does it
mean for the European Union? Euro Surveill.: Bulletin Europeen Sur Les Maladies
Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease Bulletin 19 (43). https://doi.org/
10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.43.20941.
Goyal, S.M., Gerba, C.P., 1979. Comparative adsorption of human enteroviruses, simian
rotavirus, and selected bacteriophages to soils. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 38 (2),
241–247.
Grabow, W.O.K., 2001. Bacteriophages: update on application as models for viruses in
water. WaterSA 27 (2), 251–268. https://doi.org/10.4314/wsa.v27i2.4999.
Gray, N.F., 2014. Chapter thirty-one—free and combined chlorine. In: Percival, S.L.,
Yates, M.V., Williams, D.W., Chalmers, R.M., Gray, N.F. (Eds.), Microbiology of
Waterborne Diseases, second ed. Academic Press, pp. 571–590. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-415846-7.00031-7.
Griffith, J.F., Weisberg, S.B., Arnold, B.F., Cao, Y., Schiff, K.C., Colford, J.M., 2016.
Epidemiologic evaluation of multiple alternate microbial water quality monitoring
indicators at three California beaches. Water Res. 94, 371–381. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.036.
Griffith, J.F., Weisberg, S.B., Arnold, B.F., Cao, Y., Schiff, K.C., Colford, J.M., 2016a.
Epidemiologic evaluation of multiple alternate microbial water quality monitoring
indicators at three California beaches. Water Res. 94, 371–381. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.036.
Griffith, J.F., Weisberg, S.B., Arnold, B.F., Cao, Y., Schiff, K.C., Colford, J.M., 2016b.
Epidemiologic evaluation of multiple alternate microbial water quality monitoring
indicators at three California beaches. Water Res. 94, 371–381. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.036.
Guzmán, C., Mocé-Llivina, L., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., 2008. Evaluation of Escherichia coli
host strain CB390 for simultaneous detection of somatic and F-specific coliphages.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74 (2), 531–534. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01710-07.

14



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Guzmán Luna, C., Costán-Longares, A., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., 2009. Detection of somatic
coliphages through a bioluminescence assay measuring phage mediated release of
adenylate kinase and adenosine 5′ -triphosphate. J. Virol Methods 161 (1), 107–113.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.05.021.
Haramoto, E., Kitajima, M., Hata, A., Torrey, J.R., Masago, Y., Sano, D., Katayama, H.,
2018. A review on recent progress in the detection methods and prevalence of
human enteric viruses in water. Water Res. 135, 168–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2018.02.004.
Hartard, C., Rivet, R., Banas, S., Gantzer, C., 2015. Occurrence of and sequence variation
among F-specific RNA bacteriophage subgroups in feces and wastewater of urban
and animal origins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81 (18), 6505–6515. https://doi.org/
10.1128/AEM.01905-15.
Harwood, V.J., Boehm, A.B., Sassoubre, L.M., Vijayavel, K., Stewart, J.R., Fong, T.-T.,
Caprais, M.-P., Converse, R.R., Diston, D., Ebdon, J., Fuhrman, J.A., Gourmelon, M.,
Gentry-Shields, J., Griffith, J.F., Kashian, D.R., Noble, R.T., Taylor, H., Wicki, M.,
2013. Performance of viruses and bacteriophages for fecal source determination in a
multi-laboratory, comparative study. Water Res. 47 (18), 6929–6943. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.04.064.
Harwood, V.J., Staley, C., Badgley, B.D., Borges, K., Korajkic, A., 2014. Microbial source
tracking markers for detection of fecal contamination in environmental waters:
relationships between pathogens and human health outcomes. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
38 (1), 1–40. https://doi.org/10.1111/1574-6976.12031.
Havelaar, A., 1988. Bacteriophages as model organisms in water treatment. Microbiol.
Sci. 4, 362–364.
Hijnen, W.a.M., Beerendonk, E.F., Medema, G.J., 2006. Inactivation credit of UV
radiation for viruses, bacteria and protozoan (oo)cysts in water: a review. Water Res.
40 (1), 3–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2005.10.030.
Hodgson, K.R., Torok, V.A., Turnbull, A.R., 2017. Bacteriophages as enteric viral
indicators in bivalve mollusc management. Food Microbiol. 65, 284–293. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2017.03.003.
Hrudey, S.E., Hrudey, E.J., 2007. Published case studies of waterborne disease
outbreaks—evidence of a recurrent threat. Water Environ. Res. 79 (3), 233–245.
https://doi.org/10.2175/106143006x95483. A Research Publication of the Water
Environment Federation.
Hrudey, S.E., Hrudey, E.J., 2019. Common themes contributing to recent drinking water
disease outbreaks in affluent nations. Water Supply 19 (6), 1767–1777. https://doi.
org/10.2166/ws.2019.051.
Hynds, P.D., Thomas, M.K., Pintar, K.D.M., 2014. Contamination of groundwater systems
in the US and Canada by enteric pathogens, 1990-2013: a review and pooledanalysis. PLoS One 9 (5), e93301. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093301.
Ijzerman, M.M., Hagedorn, C., 1992. Improved method for coliphage detection based on
beta-galactosidase induction. J. Virol Methods 40 (1), 31–36. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0166-0934(92)90004-w.
International Organization for Standardization, 2018. Non-sewered sanitation
systems—prefabricated integrated treatment units—general safety and performance
requirements for design and testing. ISO 30500:2018). https://www.iso.org/cms/
render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/07/25/72523.html.
Jakhetia, R., Verma, N.K., 2015. Identification and molecular characterisation of a novel
mu-like bacteriophage, SfMu, of Shigella flexneri. PLoS One 10 (4), e0124053.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0124053.
Janicki, R., Kate Thomas, M., Pintar, K., Fleury, M., Nesbitt, A., 2018. Drinking and
recreational water exposures among Canadians: foodbook Study 2014–2015.
J. Water Health 16 (2), 197–211. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2018.261.
Jiang, S., Noble, R., Chu, W., 2001. Human adenoviruses and coliphages in urban runoffimpacted coastal waters of Southern California. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67 (1),
179–184. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.67.1.179-184.2001.
Jofre, J., 2009. Is the replication of somatic coliphages in water environments
significant? J. Appl. Microbiol. 106 (4), 1059–1069. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2672.2008.03957.x.
Jofre, J., Lucena, F., Blanch, A.R., Muniesa, M., 2016. Coliphages as model organisms in
the characterization and management of water resources. Water 8 (5), 199. https://
doi.org/10.3390/w8050199.
Karim, M.R., Glenn, E.P., Gerba, C.P., 2008. The effect of wetland vegetation on the
survival of Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, bacteriophage MS-2 and polio
virus. J. Water Health 6 (2), 167–175. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2008.024.
Karpowicz, E., Novinscak, A., Bärlocher, F., Filion, M., 2010. QPCR quantification and
genetic characterization of Clostridium perfringens populations in biosolids
composted for 2 years. J. Appl. Microbiol. 108 (2), 571–581. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2672.2009.04441.x.
Kimura, M., Jia, Z.-J., Nakayama, N., Asakawa, S., 2008. Ecology of viruses in soils: past,
present and future perspectives. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 54 (1), 1–32. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1747-0765.2007.00197.x.
Kistemann, T., Claßen, T., Koch, C., Dangendorf, F., Fischeder, R., Gebel, J., Vacata, V.,
Exner, M., 2002. Microbial load of drinking water reservoir tributaries during
extreme rainfall and runoff. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 (5), 2188–2197. https://
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.68.5.2188-2197.2002.
Korajkic, A., McMinn, B.R., Harwood, V.J., 2018. Relationships between microbial
indicators and pathogens in recreational water settings. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ.
Health 15 (12), E2842. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15122842.
Korajkic, A., Wanjugi, P., Brooks, L., Cao, Y., Harwood, V.J., 2019. Persistence and decay
of fecal microbiota in aquatic habitats. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. : MMBR 83 (4),
e00005–19. https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.00005-19.
Kot, M., Castleden, H., Gagnon, G.A., 2014. The human dimension of water safety plans:
a critical review of literature and information gaps. Environ. Rev. https://doi.org/
10.1139/er-2014-0030.

Kott, Y., 1966. Estimation of low numbers of Escherichia coli bacteriophage by use of the
most probable number method. Appl. Microbiol. 14 (2), 141–144.
Krometis, L.-A.H., Characklis, G.W., Simmons, O.D., Dilts, M.J., Likirdopulos, C.A.,
Sobsey, M.D., 2007. Intra-storm variability in microbial partitioning and microbial
loading rates. Water Res. 41 (2), 506–516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2006.09.029.
Lall, U., Johnson, T., Colohan, P., Aghakouchak, A., Brown, C., McGabe, G., Pulwarty, R.,
Sankarasubramanian, A., 2018. Chapter 3: water. In: Fourth National Climate
Assessment:, vol. II. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC,
pp. 145–173. https://nca2018.globalchange.govhttps://nca2018.globalchange.
gov/chapter/3.
Lasobras, J., Dellunde, J., Jofre, J., Lucena, F., 1999. Occurrence and levels of phages
proposed as surrogate indicators of enteric viruses in different types of sludges.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 86 (4), 723–729. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.13652672.1999.00722.x.
Lebarbenchon, C., Yang, M., Keeler, S.P., Ramakrishnan, M.A., Brown, J.D.,
Stallknecht, D.E., Sreevatsan, S., 2011. Viral replication, persistence in water and
genetic characterization of two influenza A viruses isolated from surface lake water.
PLoS One 6 (10), e26566. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026566.
Lee, D., Murphy, H.M., 2020. Private wells and rural health: groundwater contaminants
of emerging concern. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 7 (2), 129–139. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40572-020-00267-4.
Lee, J.V., Dawson, S.R., Ward, S., Surman, S.B., Neal, K.R., 1997. Bacteriophages are a
better indicator of illness rates than bacteria amongst users of a white water course
fed by a lowland river. Water Sci. Technol. 35 (11), 165–170. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0273-1223(97)00253-9.
Lee, J.E., Lee, H., Cho, Y.-H., Hur, H.-G., Ko, G., 2011. F+ RNA coliphage-based
microbial source tracking in water resources of South Korea. Sci. Total Environ.
412–413, 127–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.09.061.
Leifert, C., Ball, K., Volakakis, N., Cooper, J.M., 2008. Control of enteric pathogens in
ready-to-eat vegetable crops in organic and “low input” production systems: a
HACCP-based approach. J. Appl. Microbiol. 105 (4), 931–950. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.03794.x.
Leong, L.Y.C., 2008. Disinfection of Wastewater Effluent: Comparison of Alternative
Technologies. Water Environment Research Foundation.
Lettieri, T., Sanseverino, I., Niegowska, M., Lamy, M.-C., 2020. Microbiological
Parameters under the Drinking Water Directive: Current State of Art on Somatic
Coliphages and Clostridium perfringens and Spores. Publications Office of the
European Union. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/005492.
Li, D., Gu, A.Z., Zeng, S.-Y., Yang, W., He, M., Shi, H.-C., 2011. Monitoring and
evaluation of infectious rotaviruses in various wastewater effluents and receiving
waters revealed correlation and seasonal pattern of occurrences. J. Appl. Microbiol.
110 (5), 1129–1137. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.04954.x.
Lim, K.-Y., Wu, Y., Jiang, S.C., 2017. Assessment of Cryptosporidium and norovirus risk
associated with de facto wastewater reuse in Trinity River, Texas. Microbial Risk
Anal. 5, 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mran.2016.11.002.
Lipson, S.M., Stotzky, G., 1983. Adsorption of reovirus to clay minerals: effects of cationexchange capacity, cation saturation, and surface area. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 46
(3), 673–682.
Litsky, W., Mallmann, W.L., Fifield, C.W., 1953. A new medium for the detection of
enterococci in water. Am. J. Public Health Nation’s Health 43 (7), 873–879.
Litsky, W., Mallmann, W.L., Fifield, C.W., 1955. Comparison of the most probable
numbers of Escherichia coli and enterococci in river waters. Am. J. Public Health
Nation’s Health 45 (8), 1049–1053.
Liu, G., Qu, J., Rose, J., Medema, G., 2021. Roadmap for managing SARS-CoV-2 and
other viruses in the water environment for public health. Engineering. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eng.2020.09.015.
Locas, A., Barthe, C., Margolin, A.B., Payment, P., 2008. Groundwater microbiological
quality in Canadian drinking water municipal wells. Can. J. Microbiol. 54 (6),
472–478. https://doi.org/10.1139/w08-028.
Lowther, J.A., Bosch, A., Butot, S., Ollivier, J., Mäde, D., Rutjes, S.A., Hardouin, G.,
Lombard, B., In’t Veld, P., Leclercq, A., 2019. Validation of EN ISO method
15216—Part 1—quantification of hepatitis A virus and norovirus in food matrices.
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 288, 82–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijfoodmicro.2017.11.014.
Lucena, F., Duran, A.e., Morón, A., Calderón, E., Campos, C., Gantzer, C., Skraber, S.,
Jofre, J., 2004. Reduction of bacterial indicators and bacteriophages infecting faecal
bacteria in primary and secondary wastewater treatments. J. Appl. Microbiol. 97 (5),
1069–1076. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.02397.x.
Lucena, F., Ribas, F., Duran, A.E., Skraber, S., Gantzer, C., Campos, C., Morón, A.,
Calderón, E., Jofre, J., 2006. Occurrence of bacterial indicators and bacteriophages
infecting enteric bacteria in groundwater in different geographical areas. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 101 (1), 96–102. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2006.02907.x.
Mallmann, W.L., Sypien, A., 1934. Pollution indices of natural bathing places. Am. J.
Public Health Nation’s Health 24, 681–688.
Mandilara, G., Mavridou, A., Lambiri, M., Vatopoulos, A., Rigas, F., 2006. The use of
bacteriophages for monitoring the microbiological quality of sewage sludge.
Environ. Technol. 27 (4), 367–375. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593332708618657.
Mapp, L., Chambers, Y., Takundwa, P., Hill, V.R., Schneeberger, C., Knee, J., Raynor, M.,
Klonicki, P., Miller, K., Pope, M., Hwang, N., 2016. Inter-laboratory evaluation and
successful implementation of MS2 coliphage as a surrogate to establish proficiency
using a BSL-3 procedure. Water 8 (6), 248. https://doi.org/10.3390/w8060248.
Maraccini, P.A., Mattioli, M.C.M., Sassoubre, L.M., Cao, Y., Griffith, J.F., Ervin, J.S., Van
De Werfhorst, L.C., Boehm, A.B., 2016. Solar inactivation of enterococci and
Escherichia coli in natural waters: effects of water absorbance and depth. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 50 (10), 5068–5076. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b00505.

15



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Martín-Díaz, J., Lucena, F., Blanch, A.R., Jofre, J., 2020. Review: indicator
bacteriophages in sludge, biosolids, sediments and soils. Environ. Res. 182, 109133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109133.
Mateu, M.G., 2013. Introduction: the structural basis of virus function. Struct. Phys.
Virus. 68, 3–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-6552-8_1.
Mattioli, M.C., Benedict, K.M., Murphy, J., Kahler, A., Kline, K.E., Longenberger, A.,
Mitchell, P.K., Watkins, S., Berger, P., Shanks, O.C., Barrett, C.E., Barclay, L., Hall, A.
J., Hill, V., Weltman, A., 2021. Identifying septic pollution exposure routes during a
waterborne norovirus outbreak—a new application for human-associated microbial
source tracking qPCR. J. Microbiol. Methods 180, 106091. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mimet.2020.106091.
McKee, B.A., Molina, M., Cyterski, M., Couch, A., 2020. Microbial source tracking (MST)
in Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area: seasonal and precipitation trends
in MST marker concentrations, and associations with E. coli levels, pathogenic
marker presence, and land use. Water Res. 171, 115435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2019.115435.
McMinn, B.R., Huff, E.M., Rhodes, E.R., Korajkic, A., 2017. Concentration and
quantification of somatic and F+ coliphages from recreational waters. J. Virol
Methods 249, 58–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2017.08.006.
McMinn, B.R., Rhodes, E.R., Huff, E.M., Korajkic, A., 2020. Decay of infectious
adenovirus and coliphages in freshwater habitats is differentially affected by
ambient sunlight and the presence of indigenous protozoa communities. Virol. J. 17
(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-019-1274-x.
Mendez, J., Jofre, J., Lucena, F., Contreras, N., Mooijman, K., Araujo, R., 2002.
Conservation of phage reference materials and water samples containing
bacteriophages of enteric bacteria. J. Virol Methods 106 (2), 215–224. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0166-0934(02)00163-5.
Meng, Q.S., Gerba, C.P., 1996. Comparative inactivation of enteric adenoviruses,
poliovirus and coliphages by ultraviolet irradiation. Water Res. 30 (11), 2665–2668.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(96)00179-0.
Michen, B., Graule, T., 2010. Isoelectric points of viruses. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109 (2),
388–397. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2010.04663.x.
Mocé-Llivina, L., Muniesa, M., Pimenta-Vale, H., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., 2003. Survival of
bacterial indicator species and bacteriophages after thermal treatment of sludge and
sewage. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69 (3), 1452–1456. https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.69.3.1452-1456.2003.
Montemayor, M., Costan, A., Lucena, F., Jofre, J., Muñoz, J., Dalmau, E., Mujeriego, R.,
Sala, L., 2008. The combined performance of UV light and chlorine during reclaimed
water disinfection. Water Sci. Technol. 57 (6), 935–940. https://doi.org/10.2166/
wst.2008.206. A Journal of the International Association on Water Pollution
Research.
Mooijman, K.A., Ghameshlou, Z., Bahar, M., Jofre, J., Havelaar, A.H., 2005. Enumeration
of bacteriophages in water by different laboratories of the European Union in two
interlaboratory comparison studies. J. Virol Methods 127 (1), 60–68. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2005.02.013.
Mukheibir, P., Howe, C., Gallet, D., 2014. WHAT’S GETTING IN THE WAY OF A ‘ONE
WATER’ APPROACH TO WATER SERVICES PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT?, vol.
8.
Muniesa, M., Ballesté, E., Imamovic, L., Pascual-Benito, M., Toribio-Avedillo, D.,
Lucena, F., Blanch, A.R., Jofre, J., 2018. Bluephage: a rapid method for the detection
of somatic coliphages used as indicators of fecal pollution in water. Water Res. 128,
10–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.10.030.
Murphy, H., 2015, March 26. Persistence of Pathogens in Sewage and Other Water Types
[Text]. Global Water Pathogen Project. Michigan State University, UNESCO. https://
www.waterpathogens.org/book/persistence-in-sewage.
Murray, A., Jackson, G., 1992. Viral dynamics: a model of the effects of size, shape,
motion and abundance of single-celled planktonic organisms and other particles.
Mar. Ecol. Progress Series - MAR ECOL-PROGR SER 89, 103–116. https://doi.org/
10.3354/meps089103.
Nappier, S.P., Aitken, M.D., Sobsey, M.D., 2006. Male-specific coliphages as indicators of
thermal inactivation of pathogens in biosolids. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72 (4),
2471–2475. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.72.4.2471-2475.2006.
Nappier, S.P., Soller, J.A., Eftim, S.E., 2018. Potable water reuse: what are the
microbiological risks? Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 5 (2), 283–292. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40572-018-0195-y.
Nappier, S.P., Hong, T., Ichida, A., Goldstone, A., Eftim, S.E., 2019. Occurrence of
coliphage in raw wastewater and in ambient water: a meta-analysis. Water Res. 153,
263–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.12.058.
National Academies Press, 2012. Water Reuse: Potential for Expanding the Nation’s
Water Supply through Reuse of Municipal Wastewater. National Academies Press,
p. 13303. https://doi.org/10.17226/13303.
Nguyen, K.H., Senay, C., Young, S., Nayak, B., Lobos, A., Conrad, J., Harwood, V.J.,
2018. Determination of wild animal sources of fecal indicator bacteria by microbial
source tracking (MST) influences regulatory decisions. Water Res. 144, 424–434.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.07.034.
Nilsen, V., Christensen, E., Myrmel, M., Heistad, A., 2019. Spatio-temporal dynamics of
virus and bacteria removal in dual-media contact-filtration for drinking water. Water
Res. 156, 9–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.02.029.
NSSP, 2019. National shellfish sanitation program (NSSP) guide for the control of
Molluscan shellfish: 2019 revision, 502. https://www.fda.gov/media/143238
/download.
Olive, M., Gan, C., Carratalà, A., Kohn, T., 2020. Control of waterborne human viruses by
indigenous bacteria and protists is influenced by temperature, virus type, and
microbial species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 86 (3) https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.01992-19 e01992-19.

O’Brien, E., Xagoraraki, I., 2019. A Water-Focused One-Health Approach for Early
Detection and Prevention of Viral Outbreaks, vol. 7. One Health, Amsterdam,
Netherlands, p. 100094. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2019.100094.
Papafragkou, E., Hewitt, J., Park, G.W., Greening, G., Vinjé, J., 2014. Challenges of
culturing human norovirus in three-dimensional organoid intestinal cell culture
models. PLoS One 8 (6), e63485. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0063485.
Park, G.W., Ng, T.F.F., Freeland, A.L., Marconi, V.C., Boom, J.A., Staat, M.A.,
Montmayeur, A.M., Browne, H., Narayanan, J., Payne, D.C., Cardemil, C.V.,
Treffiletti, A., Vinjé, J., 2020. CrAssphage as a novel tool to detect human fecal
contamination on environmental surfaces and hands. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26 (8),
1731–1739. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2608.200346.
Payment, P., Waite, M., Dufour, A., 2003. Introducing parameters for the assessment of
drinking water quality. In: Assessing Microbial Safety of Drinking Water. World
Health Organization, pp. 47–77. https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dw
q/9241546301_chap2.pdf.
Pham, M., Mintz, E.A., Nguyen, T.H., 2009. Deposition kinetics of bacteriophage MS2 to
natural organic matter: role of divalent cations. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 338 (1), 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2009.06.025.
Pillai, S.D., Meckes, M.C., Murthy, S.N., Willis, J., 2011. Developing better indicators for
pathogen presence in sewage sludges, 9781780400129. https://doi.org/10.2166/
9781780400129.
Pinheiro, M.D.O., Power, M.E., Butler, B.J., Dayeh, V.R., Slawson, R., Lee, L.E.J., Lynn, D.
H., Bols, N.C., 2007. Using Tetrahymena thermophila to study the role of protozoa in
inactivating viruses. J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 54 (2), 52S-52S.
Pinon, A., Vialette, M., 2018. Survival of viruses in water. Intervirology 61 (5), 214–222.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000484899.
Poma, H.R., Kundu, A., Wuertz, S., Rajal, V.B., 2019. Data fitting approach more critical
than exposure scenarios and treatment of censored data for quantitative microbial
risk assessment. Water Res. 154, 45–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2019.01.041.
Pouillot, R., Doren, J.M.V., Woods, J., Plante, D., Smith, M., Goblick, G., Roberts, C.,
Locas, A., Hajen, W., Stobo, J., White, J., Holtzman, J., Buenaventura, E.,
Burkhardt, W., Catford, A., Edwards, R., DePaola, A., Calci, K.R., 2015. Metaanalysis of the reduction of norovirus and male-specific coliphage concentrations in
wastewater treatment plants. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81 (14), 4669–4681. https://
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00509-15.
Prado, T., de Castro Bruni, A., Barbosa, M.R.F., Garcia, S.C., de Jesus Melo, A.M.,
Sato, M.I.Z., 2019. Performance of wastewater reclamation systems in enteric virus
removal. Sci. Total Environ. 678, 33–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.04.435.
Purnell, S.E., Ebdon, J.E., Taylor, H.D., 2011. Bacteriophage lysis of Enterococcus host
strains: a tool for microbial source tracking? Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (24),
10699–10705. https://doi.org/10.1021/es202141x.
Rachmadi, A.T., Kitajima, M., Pepper, I.L., Gerba, C.P., 2016. Enteric and indicator virus
removal by surface flow wetlands. Sci. Total Environ. 542, 976–982. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.11.001.
Rafi, K., Wagner, K.L., Gentry, T., Karthikeyan, R., Dube, A., 2018. Escherichia coli
concentration as a function of stream order and watershed size. J. Environ. Qual. 47
(5), 949–957. https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2017.12.0488.
Rajnovic, D., Muñoz-Berbel, X., Mas, J., 2019. Fast phage detection and quantification:
an optical density-based approach. PLoS One 14 (5), e0216292. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0216292.
Rames, E., Macdonald, J., 2019. The QuantiPhage assay: a novel method for the rapid
colorimetric detection of coliphages using cellulose pad materials. Water Res. 149,
98–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.10.089.
Rattanakul, S., Oguma, K., 2020. Applicability of infectivity assay for the quantification
of infectious human adenovirus genotype 5 in UV-irradiated wastewater. J. Water
Health 19 (1), 67–78. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2020.224.
Reynolds, K.A., Mena, K.D., Gerba, C.P., 2008. Risk of waterborne illness via drinking
water in the United States. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 192, 117–158. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-71724-1_4.
Rezaeinejad, S., Vergara, G.G.R.V., Woo, C.H., Lim, T.T., Sobsey, M.D., Gin, K.Y.H.,
2014. Surveillance of enteric viruses and coliphages in a tropical urban catchment.
Water Res. 58, 122–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.03.051.
Rice, J., Westerhoff, P., 2015. Spatial and Temporal Variation in De Facto Wastewater
Reuse in Drinking Water Systems across the U.S.A. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (2),
982–989. https://doi.org/10.1021/es5048057.
Rice, J., Wutich, A., Westerhoff, P., 2013. Assessment of De Facto Wastewater Reuse
across the U.S.: Trends between 1980 and 2008. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (19),
11099–11105. https://doi.org/10.1021/es402792s.
Rice, J., Via, S.H., Westerhoff, P., 2015. Extent and Impacts of Unplanned Wastewater
Reuse in US Rivers. J. AWWA (Am. Water Works Assoc.) 107 (11), E571–E581.
https://doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2015.107.0178.
Rodrigues, C., Cunha, M.Â., 2017. Assessment of the microbiological quality of
recreational waters: Indicators and methods. Euro-Mediterr. J. Environ. Integr. 2 (1),
25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41207-017-0035-8.
Rose, J., Farrah, S.R., Harwood, V.J., Levine, A., Lukasik, J., Menedez, P., Scott, T., 2004.
Reduction of Pathogens, Indicator Bacteria, and Alternative Indicators by Wastewater
Treatment and Reclamation Processes (WERF Project 00-PUM-2T. Water Environment
Research Foundation, p. 90. https://www.waterrf.org/research/projects/reduction
-pathogens-indicator-bacteria-and-alternative-indicators-wastewater.
Ross, A., Ward, S., Hyman, P., 2016. More Is Better: Selecting for Broad Host Range
Bacteriophages. Front. Microbiol. 7 https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01352.
Rusiñol, M., Fernandez-Cassi, X., Timoneda, N., Carratalà, A., Abril, J.F., Silvera, C.,
Figueras, M.J., Gelati, E., Rodó, X., Kay, D., Wyn-Jones, P., Bofill-Mas, S.,
Girones, R., 2015. Evidence of viral dissemination and seasonality in a

16



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921

Mediterranean river catchment: Implications for water pollution management.
J. Environ. Manag. 159, 58–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.05.019.
Sala-Comorera, L., Reynolds, L.J., Martin, N.A., Pascual-Benito, M., Stephens, J.H.,
Nolan, T.M., Gitto, A., O’Hare, G.M.P., O’Sullivan, J.J., García-Aljaro, C., Meijer, W.
G., 2021. CrAssphage as a human molecular marker to evaluate temporal and spatial
variability in faecal contamination of urban marine bathing waters. Sci. Total
Environ. 789, 147828. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.147828.
Sano, D., Amarasiri, M., Hata, A., Watanabe, T., Katayama, H., 2016. Risk management
of viral infectious diseases in wastewater reclamation and reuse: Review. Environ.
Int. 91, 220–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.03.001.
Santiago-Rodriguez, T.M., Hollister, E.B., 2019. Human Virome and Disease: HighThroughput Sequencing for Virus Discovery, Identification of Phage-Bacteria
Dysbiosis and Development of Therapeutic Approaches with Emphasis on the
Human Gut. Viruses 11 (7). https://doi.org/10.3390/v11070656.
Santiago-Rodriguez, T.M., Marcos, P., Monteiro, S., Urdaneta, M., Santos, R.,
Toranzos, G.A., 2013. Evaluation of Enterococcus-infecting phages as indices of fecal
pollution. J. Water Health 11 (1), 51–63. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2012.100.
Savage, W.G., Read, W.J., 1916. Significance of Streptococci in Water Supplies. J. Hyg.
15, 334–351.
Savichtcheva, O., Okabe, S., 2006. Alternative indicators of fecal pollution: Relations
with pathogens and conventional indicators, current methodologies for direct
pathogen monitoring and future application perspectives. Water Res. 40 (13),
2463–2476. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2006.04.040.
Schmiege, D., Evers, M., Zügner, V., Rickert, B., 2020. Comparing the German enabling
environment for nationwide Water Safety Plan implementation with international
experiences: Are we still thinking big or already scaling up? Int. J. Hyg Environ.
Health 228, 113553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113553.
Schuster, C.J., Ellis, A.G., Robertson, W.J., Charron, D.F., Aramini, J.J., Marshall, B.J.,
Medeiros, D.T., 2005. Infectious disease outbreaks related to drinking water in
Canada, 1974-2001. Can. J. Publ. Health = Revue Canadienne De Sante Publique 96
(4), 254–258.
Scott, W.J., 1932. Public health engineering: survey OF Connecticut’s shore bathing
waters. Am. J. Public Health Nation’s Health 22, 316–321.
Sercu, B., Van De Werfhorst, L.C., Murray, J.L.S., Holden, P.A., 2011. CultivationIndependent Analysis of Bacteria in IDEXX Quanti-Tray/2000 Fecal Indicator Assays.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77 (2), 627–633. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01113-10.
Setty, K., McConnell, R., Raucher, R., Bartram, J., 2019. Comparative evaluation of risk
management frameworks for U.S. source waters. AWWA Water Sci. 1 (1), e1125.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1125.
Sham, C., Sklenar, K., Keefe, K., 2015. Preliminary framework for Evaluating Source Water
Protection Programs (No. 4528). Water Research Foundation.
Silverman, A.I., Peterson, B.M., Boehm, A.B., McNeill, K., Nelson, K.L., 2013. Sunlight
Inactivation of Human Viruses and Bacteriophages in Coastal Waters Containing
Natural Photosensitizers. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (4), 1870–1878. https://doi.org/
10.1021/es3036913.
Sime-Ngando, T., Ram, A.S.P., 2005. Grazer effects on prokaryotes and viruses in a
freshwater microcosm experiment. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 41 (2), 115–124. https://
doi.org/10.3354/ame041115.
Simmons, F.J., Xagoraraki, I., 2011. Release of infectious human enteric viruses by fullscale wastewater utilities. Water Res. 45 (12), 3590–3598. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2011.04.001.
Sinclair, R.G., Jones, E.L., Gerba, C.P., 2009. Viruses in recreational water-borne disease
outbreaks: A review. J. Appl. Microbiol. 107 (6), 1769–1780. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2672.2009.04367.x.
Sinigalliano, C., Kim, K., Gidley, M., Yuknavage, K., Knee, K., Palacios, D., Bautista, C.,
Bonacolta, A., Lee, H.W., Maurin, L., 2021. Microbial Source Tracking of Fecal
Indicating Bacteria in Coral Reef Waters, Recreational Waters, and Groundwater of
Saipan by Real-Time Quantitative PCR. Front. Microbiol. 11, 3486. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmicb.2020.596650.
Sinton, L.W., Finlay, R.K., Lynch, P.A., 1999. Sunlight Inactivation of Fecal
Bacteriophages and Bacteria in Sewage-Polluted Seawater. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
65 (8), 3605–3613. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.65.8.3605-3613.1999.
Sinton, L.W., Hall, C.H., Lynch, P.A., Davies-Colley, R.J., 2002. Sunlight inactivation of
fecal indicator bacteria and bacteriophages from waste stabilization pond effluent in
fresh and saline waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 (3), 1122–1131. https://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.68.3.1122-1131.2002.
Skraber, S., Gassilloud, B., Gantzer, C., 2004. Comparison of Coliforms and Coliphages as
Tools for Assessment of Viral Contamination in River Water. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 70 (6), 3644. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.6.3644-3649.2004.
Skraber, S., Schijven, J., Italiaander, R., de Roda Husman, A.M., 2009a. Accumulation of
enteric bacteriophage in fresh water sediments. J. Water Health 7 (3), 372–379.
https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2009.098.
Skraber, S., Ogorzaly, L., Helmi, K., Maul, A., Hoffmann, L., Cauchie, H.-M., Gantzer, C.,
2009b. Occurrence and persistence of enteroviruses, noroviruses and F-specific RNA
phages in natural wastewater biofilms. Water Res. 43 (19), 4780–4789. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.05.020.
Smith, J.E., Millner, P.D., Jakubowski, W., Goldstein, N., Rynk, R. (Eds.), 2005.
Contemporary Perspectives on Infectious Disease Agents in Sewage Sludge and
Manure. Compost Science & Utilization/The JG Press, Inc.J.G. Press.
Sobsey, M.D., Shields, P.A., Hauchman, F.S., Davis, A.L., Rullman, V.A., Bosch, A., 1987.
Survival and persistence of hepatitis-a virus in environmental-samples. J. Med. Virol.
21 (4). A23–A23.
Soller, J.A., Schoen, M.E., Bartrand, T., Ravenscroft, J.E., Ashbolt, N.J., 2010. Estimated
human health risks from exposure to recreational waters impacted by human and
non-human sources of faecal contamination. Water Res. 44 (16), 4674–4691.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.06.049.

Soller, J.A., Eftim, S., Wade, T.J., Ichida, A.M., Clancy, J.L., Johnson, T.B., Schwab, K.,
Ramirez-Toro, G., Nappier, S., Ravenscroft, J.E., 2016. Use of quantitative microbial
risk assessment to improve interpretation of a recreational water epidemiological
study. Microbial Risk Anal. 1, 2–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mran.2015.04.001.
Soller, J.A., Eftim, S.E., Nappier, S.P., 2019. Comparison of Predicted Microbiological
Human Health Risks Associated with de Facto, Indirect, and Direct Potable Water
Reuse. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (22), 13382–13389. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.9b02002.
Stallard, M.A., Mulhern, R., Greenwood, E., Franklin, T., Engel, L.S., Fisher, M.B.,
Sobsey, M.D., Zanib, H., Noble, R.T., Stewart, J.R., Sozzi, E., 2021. Occurrence of
male-specific and somatic coliphages and relationship with rainfall in privatelyowned wells from peri-urban and rural households. Water Res. X 12, 100102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wroa.2021.100102.
Stanek, J.E., Falkinham, J.O., 2001. Rapid coliphage detection assay. J. Virol Methods 91
(1), 93–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-0934(00)00253-6.
Stewart-Pullaro, J., Daugomah, J.W., Chestnut, D.E., Graves, D.A., Sobsey, M.D.,
Scott, G.I., 2006. F+ RNA coliphage typing for microbial source tracking in surface
waters. J. Appl. Microbiol. 101 (5), 1015–1026. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.13652672.2006.03011.x.
Stokdyk, J.P., Firnstahl, A.D., Walsh, J.F., Spencer, S.K., de Lambert, J.R., Anderson, A.
C., Rezania, L.-I.W., Kieke, B.A., Borchardt, M.A., 2020. Viral, bacterial, and
protozoan pathogens and fecal markers in wells supplying groundwater to public
water systems in Minnesota, USA. Water Res. 178, 115814. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2020.115814.
Stokes, G.G., 1851. On the Effect of the Internal Friction of Fluids on the Motion of
Pendulums. Trans. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 9, 8.
Summerill, C., Pollard, S.J.T., Smith, J.A., 2010. The role of organizational culture and
leadership in water safety plan implementation for improved risk management. Sci.
Total Environ. 408 (20), 4319–4327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2010.06.043.
Suzuki, Y., Hashimoto, R., Xie, H., Nishimura, E., Nishiyama, M., Nukazawa, K., Ishii, S.,
2019. Growth and antibiotic resistance acquisition of Escherichia coli in a river that
receives treated sewage effluent. Sci. Total Environ. 690, 696–704. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.050.
Tandukar, S., Sherchan, S.P., Haramoto, E., 2020. Applicability of crAssphage, pepper
mild mottle virus, and tobacco mosaic virus as indicators of reduction of enteric
viruses during wastewater treatment. Sci. Rep. 10 (1), 3616. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-60547-9.
Templeton, M.R., Andrews, R.C., Hofmann, R., 2008. Particle-Associated Viruses in
Water: Impacts on Disinfection Processes. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 38 (3),
137–164. https://doi.org/10.1080/10643380601174764.
Teunis, P.F.M., Le Guyader, F.S., Liu, P., Ollivier, J., Moe, C.L., 2020. Noroviruses are
highly infectious but there is strong variation in host susceptibility and virus
pathogenicity. Epidemics 32, 100401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
epidem.2020.100401.
Thebault, A., Teunis, P.F.M., Le Pendu, J., Le Guyader, F.S., Denis, J.-B., 2013. Infectivity
of GI and GII noroviruses established from oyster related outbreaks. Epidemics 5 (2),
98–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2012.12.004.
Thompson, S.S., Jackson, J.L., Suva-Castillo, M., Yanko, W.A., El Jack, Z., Kuo, J.,
Chen, C.-L., Williams, F.P., Schnurr, D.P., 2003. Detection of Infectious Human
Adenoviruses in Tertiary-Treated and Ultraviolet-Disinfected Wastewater. Water
Environ. Res. 75 (2), 163–170. https://doi.org/10.2175/106143003X140944.
Toribio-Avedillo, D., Martín-Díaz, J., Blanco-Picazo, P., Blanch, A.R., Muniesa, M., 2020.
F-specific coliphage detection by the Bluephage method. Water Res. 184, 116215.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.116215.
Toribio-Avedillo, D., Blanch, A.R., Muniesa, M., Rodríguez-Rubio, L., 2021.
Bacteriophages as Fecal Pollution Indicators. Viruses 13 (6), 1089. https://doi.org/
10.3390/v13061089.
Toze, S., Hodgers, L., Palmer, A., Sidhu, J., Page, D., Williams, M., Kookana, R.S.,
Bartkow, M., Sedlak, D.L., Stratton, H., 2012. Natural Attenuation of Pathogens and
Trace Contaminants in South East Queensland Waterways. Urban Water Security
Research Alliance.
Tufenkji, N., 2007. Colloid and Microbe Migration in Granular Environments: A
Discussion of Modelling Methods. In: Frimmel, F.H., Von Der Kammer, F.,
Flemming, H.-C. (Eds.), Colloidal Transport in Porous Media. Springer, pp. 119–142.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-71339-5_5.
Tyrrell, S.A., Rippey, S.R., Watkins, W.D., 1995. Inactivation of bacterial and viral
indicators in secondary sewage effluents, using chlorine and ozone. Water Res. 29
(11), 2483–2490. https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(95)00103-R.
USEPA, 2012. Recreational Water Quality Criteria (No. 820-F-12–058. USEPA, Office of
Water, Washington, DC, p. 69.
USEPA, 2014. Method 1603: Escherichia coli (E.coli) in Water by Membrane Filtration
Using Modified membrane-Thermotolerant Escherichia coli Agar. EPA-821-R-14010; p. 42). https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-08/documents/met
hod_1603_2009.pdf.
USEPA, 2015a. Method 1611.1: Enterococci in Water by TaqMan® Quantitative
Polymerase Chain Reaction (qPCR) (EPA-820-R-15-008). USEPA, Office of Water,
Washington, DC.
USEPA, 2015b. Review of Coliphages as Possible Indicators of Fecal Contamination for
Ambient Water Quality (No. 820-R-15–098. USEPA, Office of Water, Washington, DC,
p. 129. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-07/documents/revi
ew_of_coliphages_as_possible_indicators_of_fecal_contamination_for_ambient_water_
quality.pdf.
USEPA, 2016. Proceedings from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Coliphage Experts Workshop (No. 822-R-17–003; p. 94). In: https://www.epa.gov/si

17



K. Fitzmorris-Brisolara et al.

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 240 (2022) 113921
Environmental Protection Agency Alternative Test Procedure Protocol. J. AOAC Int.
94 (5), 1573–1580. https://doi.org/10.5740/jaoacint.11-114.
Wei, W., Zhang, R., Peng, L., Liang, Y., Jiao, N., 2018. Effects of temperature and
photosynthetically active radiation on virioplankton decay in the western Pacific
Ocean. Sci. Rep. 8 (1), 1525. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-19678-3.
Wiedenmann, A., Krüger, P., Dietz, K., López-Pila, J.M., Szewzyk, R., Botzenhart, K.,
2006. A randomized controlled trial assessing infectious disease risks from bathing in
fresh recreational waters in relation to the concentration of Escherichia coli,
intestinal enterococci, Clostridium perfringens, and somatic coliphages. Environ.
Health Perspect. 114 (2), 228–236. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8115.
Wilkes, G., Edge, T., Gannon, V., Jokinen, C., Lyautey, E., Medeiros, D., Neumann, N.,
Ruecker, N., Topp, E., Lapen, D.R., 2009. Seasonal relationships among indicator
bacteria, pathogenic bacteria, Cryptosporidium oocysts, Giardia cysts, and
hydrological indices for surface waters within an agricultural landscape. Water Res.
43 (8), 2209–2223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.01.033.
Winslow, C.E.A., Moxon, D., 1928. Bacterial Pollution of Bathing Beach Waters in New
Haven Harbor. Am. J. Hyg. 8, 299–310.
Wommack, K.E., Colwell, R.R., 2000. Virioplankton: Viruses in Aquatic Ecosystems.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64 (1), 69–114. https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.64.1.69114.2000.
World Health Organization (Ed.), 2011. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, fourth
ed. World Health Organization.
World Health Organization, 2018. WHO recommendations on scientific, analytical and
epidemiological developments relevant to the parameters for bathing water quality
in the Bathing Water Directive (2006/7/EC). https://www.who.
int/publications/m/item/who-recommendations-on-scien
tific-analytical-and-epidemiological-developments-relevant-to-th
e-parameters-for-bathing-water-quality-in-the-bathing-water-directive-(2006-7-ec.
Worley-Morse, T., Mann, M., Khunjar, W., Olabode, L., Gonzalez, R., 2019. Evaluating
the fate of bacterial indicators, viral indicators, and viruses in water resource
recovery facilities. Water Environ. Res. 91 (9), 830–842. https://doi.org/10.1002/
wer.1096.
Wu, J., Long, S.C., Das, D., Dorner, S.M., 2011. Are microbial indicators and pathogens
correlated? A statistical analysis of 40 years of research. J. Water Health 9 (2),
265–278. https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2011.117.
Wyer, M.D., Wyn-Jones, A.P., Kay, D., Au-Yeung, H.-K.C., Gironés, R., López-Pila, J., de
Roda Husman, A.M., Rutjes, S., Schneider, O., 2012. Relationships between human
adenoviruses and faecal indicator organisms in European recreational waters. Water
Res. 46 (13), 4130–4141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.04.008.
Xagoraraki, I., Yin, Z., Svambayev, Z., 2014. Fate of Viruses in Water Systems. J. Environ.
Eng. 140 (7), 04014020 https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)EE.1943-7870.0000827.
Yates, M.V., Yates, S.R., Wagner, J., Gerba, C.P., 1987. Modeling virus survival and
transport in the subsurface. J. Contam. Hydrol. 1 (3), 329–345. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0169-7722(87)90012-X.
Yezli, S., Otter, J.A., 2011. Minimum Infective Dose of the Major Human Respiratory and
Enteric Viruses Transmitted Through Food and the Environment. Food Environ.
Virol. 3 (1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12560-011-9056-7.
Yutin, N., Makarova, K.S., Gussow, A.B., Krupovic, M., Segall, A., Edwards, R.A.,
Koonin, E.V., 2018. Discovery of an expansive bacteriophage family that includes the
most abundant viruses from the human gut. Nat. Microbiol. 3 (1), 38–46. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41564-017-0053-y.
Zambon, M., Martin, J., 2018. Polio eradication: Next steps and future challenges. Euro
Surveill. 23 (47), 1800625. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.
ES.2018.23.47.1800625.
Zyara, A.M., Torvinen, E., Veijalainen, A.-M., Heinonen-Tanski, H., 2016. The effect of
chlorine and combined chlorine/UV treatment on coliphages in drinking water
disinfection. J. Water Health 14 (4), 640–649. https://doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2016.144.

tes/production/files/2017-08/documents/coliphage-workshop-proceedings-201
6-508.pdf.
USEPA, 2018a. Method 1642: Male-specific (F+) and Somatic Coliphage in Recreational
Waters and Wastewater by Ultrafiltration (UF) and Single Agar Layer (SAL) Procedure
(No. 820-R-18–001, p. 40.
USEPA, 2018b. Method 1643: Male-specific (F+) and Somatic Coliphage in Secondary (No
Disinfection) Wastewater by the Single Agar Layer (SAL) Procedure (No. 820-R-18–003,
p. 32.
Uyttendaele, M., Jaykus, L.-A., Amoah, P., Chiodini, A., Cunliffe, D., Jacxsens, L.,
Holvoet, K., Korsten, L., Lau, M., McClure, P., Medema, G., Sampers, I., Jasti, P.R.,
2015. Microbial Hazards in Irrigation Water: Standards, Norms, and Testing to
Manage Use of Water in Fresh Produce Primary Production. Compr. Rev. Food Sci.
Food Saf. 14 (4), 336–356. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12133.
Vadde, K.K., McCarthy, A.J., Rong, R., Sekar, R., 2019. Quantification of Microbial
Source Tracking and Pathogenic Bacterial Markers in Water and Sediments of Tiaoxi
River (Taihu Watershed). Front. Microbiol. 10, 699. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2019.00699.
van Asperen, I.A., Medema, G., Borgdorff, M.W., Sprenger, M.J., Havelaar, A.H., 1998.
Risk of gastroenteritis among triathletes in relation to faecal pollution of fresh
waters. Int. J. Epidemiol. 27 (2), 309–315. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/27.2.309.
Vanden Esschert, K.L., Mattioli, M.C., Hilborn, E.D., Roberts, V.A., Yu, A.T., Lamba, K.,
Arzaga, G., Zahn, M., Marsh, Z., Combes, S.M., Smith, E.S., Robinson, T.J.,
Gretsch, S.R., Laco, J.P., Wikswo, M.E., Miller, A.D., Tack, D.M., Wade, T.J.,
Hlavsa, M.C., 2020. Outbreaks Associated with Untreated Recreational
Water—California, Maine, and Minnesota, 2018–2019. MMWR 69 (25), 781–783.
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6925a3. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report.
Verwey, E.J., Overbeek, J., 1948. Theory of the Stability of Lyophobic Colloids. Elsevier.
http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/gold/pdfs/teaching/VerweyOverbeek.pdf.
Viau, E.J., Goodwin, K.D., Yamahara, K.M., Layton, B.A., Sassoubre, L.M., Burns, S.L.,
Tong, H.-I., Wong, S.H.C., Lu, Y., Boehm, A.B., 2011. Bacterial pathogens in
Hawaiian coastal streams—Associations with fecal indicators, land cover, and water
quality. Water Res. 45 (11), 3279–3290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2011.03.033.
Wade, T.J., Pai, N., Eisenberg, J.N.S., Colford, J.M., 2003. Do U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency water quality guidelines for recreational waters prevent
gastrointestinal illness? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ. Health
Perspect. 111 (8), 1102–1109. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.6241.
Wade, T.J., Calderon, R.L., Sams, E., Beach, M., Brenner, K.P., Williams, A.H., Dufour, A.
P., 2006. Rapidly measured indicators of recreational water quality are predictive of
swimming-associated gastrointestinal illness. Environ. Health Perspect. 114 (1),
24–28. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8273.
Wade, T.J., Sams, E., Brenner, K.P., Haugland, R., Chern, E., Beach, M., Wymer, L.,
Rankin, C.C., Love, D., Li, Q., Noble, R., Dufour, A.P., 2010. Rapidly measured
indicators of recreational water quality and swimming-associated illness at marine
beaches: A prospective cohort study. Environ. Health Glob. Access Sci. Source 9, 66.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-9-66.
Wallender, E.K., Ailes, E.C., Yoder, J.S., Roberts, V.A., Brunkard, J.M., 2014.
Contributing Factors to Disease Outbreaks Associated with Untreated Groundwater.
Groundwater 52 (6), 886–897. https://doi.org/10.1111/gwat.12121.
Wangkahad, B., Mongkolsuk, S., Sirikanchana, K., 2017. Integrated Multivariate Analysis
with Nondetects for the Development of Human Sewage Source-Tracking Tools
Using Bacteriophages of Enterococcus faecalis. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51 (4),
2235–2245. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b04714.
Ward, R.L., Knowlton, D.R., Winston, P.E., 1986. Mechanism of inactivation of enteric
viruses in fresh water. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 52 (3), 450–459.
Warden, P.S., DeSarno, M.S., Volk, S.E., Eldred, B.J., 2011. Evaluation of Colilert-18® for
Detection and Enumeration of Fecal Coliform Bacteria in Wastewater Using the U.S.

18

