CHAPTER FOUR

Environmental and
Animal-Associated Enterococci
Christopher Staley*, Gary M. Dunny†, Michael J. Sadowsky*,{,1
*BioTechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
†
Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
{
Department of Soil, Water and Climate, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
1
Corresponding author: e-mail address: sadowsky@umn.edu

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Host-Associated Enterococci
2.1 Summary of species found in various animal hosts
2.2 Genetic/genomic analysis of host specificity, virulence, and drug resistance
2.3 Transmission of strains and genes between different hosts
3. Enterococci in Extra-Enteric Habitats
3.1 Soil
3.2 Sediment
3.3 Freshwater
3.4 Marine water
3.5 Beach sand
3.6 Vegetation
4. Factors Influencing the Ecology of Enterococci in Extra-Enteric Habitats
4.1 Sunlight
4.2 Salinity
4.3 Starvation
4.4 Predation
References

148
150
152
156
158
159
159
163
165
166
168
170
172
172
175
176
177
178

Abstract
Enterococci are generally commensal bacteria inhabiting the gastrointestinal tract of
humans and animals. They have, however, been implicated as the etiological agent
of a variety of illnesses and nosocomial infections. In addition to pathogenic potential,
there is growing concern regarding the incidence of antibiotic resistance and genetic
exchange among Enterococcus spp. within and among a variety of animal hosts. While
primarily considered an enteric group, extra-enteric habitats in which enterococci persist and potentially grow have been studied for decades. Although many biotic (e.g.,
predation) and abiotic (e.g., sunlight, nutrients, and salinity) stressors have been thought
to limit the success of enterococci in these secondary habitats, a growing body of evidence suggests that certain strains may become naturalized to environmental habitats.
Advances in Applied Microbiology, Volume 87
ISSN 0065-2164
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800261-2.00004-9

# 2014 Elsevier Inc.

All rights reserved.

147



148

Christopher Staley et al.

Enterococci have also been used for decades as indicators of fecal contamination in
recreational waters where increased concentrations of this group have been linked
to the incidence of illness in humans following recreational use of these waters. Persistence of enterococci in secondary habitats, however, suggests that their presence in
ambient waters may prove to be a poor indicator of actual risks to public health. In this
chapter, we provide a review of the existing body of literature concerning animal host
associations, genetic exchange is reviewed, and emphasis is placed on the growing
body of evidence for the persistence and growth of enterococci in secondary habitats.

1. INTRODUCTION
The enterococci are members of the genus Enterococcus [formerly
referred to as enteric members of genus Streptococcus or fecal streptococci
(Collins, Jones, Farrow, Kilpper-Bläz, & Schleifer, 1984; Schleifer &
Kilpper-Bälz, 1984)] that have been historically described as bacteria capable
of growth between 10 and 45  C, in 6.5% NaCl, and at pH 9.6 (Sherman,
1937). They are gram-positive bacteria and appear as spherical or ovoid cells
that are arranged as single cells, in pairs, or in short chains (Byappanahalli,
Nevers, Korajkic, Staley, & Harwood, 2012; Murray, 1990). The enterococci are obligate fermentative bacteria. While a few species produce
pseudocatalase (Schleifer & Kilpper-Bälz, 1984), they are generally
catalase-negative (Byappanahalli, Nevers, et al., 2012; Murray, 1990).
Motility and pigmentation of enterococci vary by species (Collins,
Farrow, & Jones, 1986; de Vaux, Laguerre, Divies, & Prevost, 1998;
Martinez-Murcia & Collins, 1991). Currently, 36 species of Enterococcus
have been identified from a variety of habitats and are classified into five
groups, with varying pathogenic potential toward humans (Byappanahalli,
Nevers, et al., 2012).
While many Enterococcus spp. are generally commensal bacteria, several
species have been described as human pathogens (Moellering, 1992).
Enterococci have been implicated as etiological agents of endocarditis,
enterococcal bacteremia, neonatal infections, central nervous system
infections, and abdominal and pelvic infections (Buchino, Ciambarella, &
Light, 1979; Eigler, Wellman, Rooke, Keith, & Svien, 1961; Garrison,
Fry, Berberich, & Polk, 1982; Gross, Harkavy, Barden, & Flower, 1976;
Moellering, Watson, & Kunz, 1974; Murray, 1990). Perhaps of greatest
concern, however, is the widespread implication of enterococci, especially
Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium, in nosocomial infections and their



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

149

increasing resistance to numerous antibiotics (Tendolkar, Baghdayan, &
Shankar, 2003).
Enterococcus spp. strains have been well characterized and are known to
inhabit the gut of humans and a variety of animals (de Graef et al., 2003;
de Vaux et al., 1998; Devriese, Ceyssens, Rodrigues, & Collins, 1990;
Noble, 1978). Due to their prevalence and abundance in feces, these bacteria
have been used for decades as indicators of sewage or fecal contamination
(fecal indicator bacteria; FIB) in recreational waters (United States
Environmental Protection Agency, 1986). The US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) has suggested that coastal states and those bordering the Great
Lakes states use enterococci as an alternative indicator of fecal contamination
(United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2012). Epidemiological
studies done in marine and fresh waters have shown that there is a strong positive correlation with enterococcal concentration and the risk of gastroenteritis
associated with swimming (Cabelli, Dufour, McCabe, & Levin, 1982; Wade
et al., 2008, 2006; Wade, Pai, Eisenberg, & Colford, 2003).
One major limitation of current FIB methods, including those used for
enterococci, is that the bacteria require approximately 24 h to grow and
enumerate, providing antecedent estimates of water quality. This may lead
to unnecessary beach closures, exposure of swimmers and recreationists to
poor-quality water, and skepticism among the public. The BEACH Act,
passed by Congress in 2000, resulted in EPA’s development of a rapid, quantitative polymerase chain reaction method to quantify enterococci in 2 h in
recreational waters (Santo Domingo, Siefring, & Haugland, 2003). This
rapid method is now being considered for use in California to reduce the
time it takes to notify swimmers of poor water quality and to protect public
health (Griffith & Weisberg, 2011).
Enterococci have also been found in a variety of environmental habitats
including soils (Mundt, 1961), sediments (Gary & Adams, 1985; ObiriDanso & Jones, 2000), freshwater (Gary & Adams, 1985), marine waters
(Boehm et al., 2002), beach sand (Sanchez, Agudo, Castro, Alves, &
Martins, 1986), and a variety plants and aquatic vegetation (Muller,
Ulrich, Ott, & Muller, 2001; Mundt, 1961; Whitman, Shively, Pawlik,
Nevers, & Byappanahalli, 2003). These environmental habitats often have
limited exposure to human inputs.
The presumption to date has been that when enterococci are shed from
the gastrointestinal tract of animal hosts, they will decay in secondary environmental habitats due to ecological stressors, such as nutrient depravation,
predation, or ultraviolet radiation. More recently, however, the occurrence,



150

Christopher Staley et al.

persistence, and population dynamics of enterococci in extra-enteric, environmental habitats have received increasing attention (Byappanahalli,
Nevers, et al., 2012). Recent characterization of enterococci in extra-enteric
habitats has revealed the presence of apparently stable, potentially naturalized, environmental populations (Badgley, Thomas, & Harwood, 2010),
and such populations may confound the use of enterococci as FIB if they
are present in high abundance in the absence of fecal contamination and
human pathogens.

2. HOST-ASSOCIATED ENTEROCOCCI
The enterococci are ubiquitous and hardy cocci that are part of the
gastrointestinal microbiota of many if not most metazoans. While most
strains require numerous growth factors, such as vitamins and amino acids,
the enterococci are remarkably resistant to numerous environmental stresses,
and remarkably adaptable to survival and growth in diverse ecological
niches. This is illustrated by major diagnostic phenotypes, such as growth
at temperatures ranging from 10 to 45  C and resistance to bile salts, sodium
chloride, and desiccation (as reviewed by Huycke, 2002). The cumulative
body of literature from published studies characterizing enterococci isolated
from host-associated and environmental niches (see Aarestrup, Butaye, &
Witte, 2002; Tannock & Cook, 2002 for reviews) indicate that the most
commonly identified species are E. faecalis and E. faecium. While numerous
additional species have been proposed over the past century, it is only within
the past decade that phylogenetic studies based on analysis of ribosomal
RNA gene sequences, and of a few other highly conserved reference genes,
have been widely applied to a large number of enterococcal isolates of
diverse origin (McBride, Fischetti, Leblanc, Moellering, & Gilmore,
2007; Naser et al., 2005; Willems et al., 2012). More recently, complete
genome sequences for numerous E. faecalis and E. faecium strains, as well
as sequences of a few strains of other species, have become available
(Aakra et al., 2005; Bourgogne et al., 2008; Palmer, Carniol, et al., 2010;
Palmer et al., 2012; Paulsen et al., 2003). Results of these analyses suggest
that this genus is comprised of about 5–6 major groups, with E. faeciumand E. faecalis-like strains comprising the groups containing the mostfrequently identified species (Gilmore, Lebreton, & van Schaik, 2013,
Naser et al., 2005).
The first comprehensive efforts by Mundt and coworkers (Martin &
Mundt, 1972; Mundt, 1963a) to culture and characterize enterococci from



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

151

the gastrointestinal tracts of animal species including mammals, reptiles,
birds, and insects had success rates ranging from 32% to 86%. Gilmore
et al. noted that since culture-based methods significantly underestimate
the true carriage rate (Gilmore et al., 2013), it is conceivable that enterococci
may have been members of the gut microbiota of all of these diverse animals
since before they diverged from their last common ancestor over 400 million
years ago. While it is increasingly clear that strains endemic to particular
niches have evolved genotypes that optimize their competitive fitness in
those niches, the inherent robustness common to all of these organisms
translates into significant potential for movement between diverse niches,
including between hosts and from a host to the environment. This complicates the definition of the host range of various species and genotypes. Thus,
the “predominant” species associated with a given animal host should not be
considered as a complete set of all possible isolates capable of colonizing that
host. Given the propensity of the enterococci to harbor various mobile
genetic elements (Gentry-Weeks, Coburn, & Gilmore, 2002; Gilmore
et al., 2013; Palmer, Kos, & Gilmore, 2010; Paulsen et al., 2003;
Tremblay, Letellier, Quessy, Daignault, & Archambault, 2012), their natural
resiliency, adaptability, and ability to transit between distinct niches also
makes them major players in the evolutionary processes mediated by lateral
gene transfer.
In addition to their adaptability to different environments, another
important trait of these organisms is that they can rapidly change from a
low-abundance commensal to a predominant population of the microbiota,
with a frequent consequence being pathogenic effects on the host (Gilmore
et al., 2013). These changes typically result from homeostatic disturbances of
the host or the microbial community, including, but not limited to, antibiotic exposure. The research literature on environmental enterococci discussed elsewhere in this chapter suggests the likelihood that similar
increases in enterococcal populations likely result from perturbing nonhostassociated environments as well. The cumulative data from numerous
studies suggest that these organisms may have evolved an “under the radar”
lifestyle of persistence at relatively low levels, while begin poised to take
advantage of various stresses that are harmful to many microbes inhabiting
the same niches. Consequently, disturbance of the natural homeostatic
mechanisms that maintain the natural community allows the enterococcal
residents to proliferate in this disturbed niche. This proliferation is frequently
accompanied by the spread of the enterococcal strains to new niches
(Gilmore et al., 2013; Palmer et al., 2012; Tannock & Cook, 2002;



152

Christopher Staley et al.

Whitman et al., 1996), and in some cases resulting in a diseased state. Under
these conditions, the transfer of mobile elements may also increase and
confer additional selective benefits for the recipients of these elements.
In spite of the increasing prevalence of multiply-resistant enterococci in
life-threatening infections of hospital patients, our understanding of the
genetic basis and phenotypic basis for either the commensal or pathogenic
lifestyles of the enterococci is still quite limited. However, these questions
are beginning to be addressed for the predominant human and animal species
(E. faecalis and E. faecium) using genomic approaches, and there is great
promise that continued efforts will eventually elucidate these issues. Below
we summarize what is known about the enterococcal flora of various human
and nonhuman hosts, and we review emerging work examining the genotypic basis for colonization and virulence in humans and animals, as well as
the transmission of strains and genes between different reservoirs.

2.1. Summary of species found in various animal hosts
The vast majority of the studies of host-associated enterococci have focused
on the intestinal microbiota of healthy humans and individuals treated with
antibiotics, as well as on isolates obtained from human infections. Most isolates in the latter category were from opportunistic infections occurring in
hospital patients or in other individuals with chronic conditions that compromised the function of their normal immune defenses. As indicated in
Table 4.1, the predominant intestinal species, E. faecalis, is found in healthy
individuals as well as those persons treated with antibiotics other than the
glycopeptides vancomycin or teicoplanin. Likewise, E. faecalis is responsible
for a large majority of the total set of enterococcal infections (Bennett &
Dunny, 2010; Gilmore, Coburn, Nallapareddy, & Murray, 2002;
Lempiainen, Kinnunen, Mertanen, & Wright, 2005; Shankar,
Baghdayan, & Gilmore, 2002; Tendolkar et al., 2003). However,
vancomycin-resistant E. faecium shows a strong predilection for becoming
dominant in the intestinal tract of vancomycin-treated individuals, and is
the most commonly isolated vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus species from
human infections (Table 4.2).
The intestinal tract is generally considered the major natural habitat for
human-associated enterococci, but it is clear that they are commonly present
at low numbers in niches such as the oral cavity, where they can become
more prominent in the context of endodontic infections (Ferrari, Cai, &
Bombana, 2005; Sedgley, Lennan, & Clewell, 2004) or oral tumors



Table 4.1 Commensal association of enterococci with various hosts**
Animal host

Comments or
characteristics

Enterococcus species
E. faecalis E. faecium E. durans E. hirae E. mundtii E. cecorum E. columbae E. casseliflavis E. gallinarum E. avium E. raffinosus

þþ

þ

þ*

þþ*

Dog or cat

þ

þ

þ

Chicken

þþ

þþ

þþ

Pig

þþ

þ

Calf

þþ

þþ

Cow

þ

þ

Wild birds

þþ

Human

Invertebrates þþ

þ
þ
þþ

þ

þ

þþ

þ

þ

þ
þ

Succession of
species from day 1
(faecalis)–day
10 (facium group)
to adult (cecorum)
E. faecalis higher in
intestine than
feces. E. faecium
higher in feces
than intestine

þ

þ

þþ

þþ

þ

S. bovis tends to
replace
enterococci in
adult cattle
E. faecalis
predominant in
ducks; columbae
predominant in
pigeons

þþ

þþ: predominant isolate; þ: occasional isolate; þþ*: predominant following vancomycin treatment; þ*: occasional following vancomycin treatment; **: compiled from cumulative data reviewed by Aarestrup et al.
(2002), Facklam (2002), Tannock and Cook (2002), and Gilmore et al. (2013).



Table 4.2 Enterococcal species associated with infections**
Animal host

Comments or
characteristics

Enterococcus species
E. faecalis E. faecium E. durans E. hirae E. mundtii E. casseliflavis E. gallinarum E. avium E. raffinosus

Human

þþ

þ

þ*

þþ*

Dog or cat

þ*

þ*

þ

þ

Chicken

þ

þ

þ

Pig

þ

þ

þ

Cattle
(mastitis)

þþ

þ

þ

þ

þ

þþ

Cattle
(intestinal
infections)
Wild animals

Invertebrates þ

þ*

þ*

þ*

þ*

þ*

Bloodstream, wounds,
endocarditis, urinary tract

þ

Sporadic enterococcal
isolates from infected fish
and other animals. Strains
not well characterized
þ

Isolates from infected
wild insects. Also can
produce experimental
infections in larvae and
worms

þþ: predominant isolate; þ: occasional isolate; þþ*: predominant in vancomycin-treated patients; þ*: occasional vancomycin-treated patients; **: compiled from cumulative data
reviewed by Aarestrup et al. (2002), Gilmore et al. (2002), and Gilmore et al. (2013).



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

155

(Boonanantanasarn et al., 2012). The human intestinal tract is likely to harbor additional enterococcal species (e.g., Enterococcus durans, Enterococcus
hirae, Enterococcus mundtii, Enterococcus casseliflavus, Enterococcus gallinarum, or
Enterococcus avium) at very low numbers, as evidenced by their regular isolation from vancomycin-resistant hospital infections.
Much of the analysis of the enterococci associated with nonhuman hosts
has focused on farm animals and pets. E. faecalis, E. faecium, and several other
species are commonly identified as members of the normal intestinal flora of
numerous animal species. Certain species and age groups exhibit trends, but
not absolute specificity, for presence in a particular host or a particular subpopulation of a given host. Among farm animals, the predominant enterococci in pigs are most similar to those of humans (Devriese, Hommez, Pot, &
Haesebrouck, 1994). It is also interesting to note that age-related succession
in the predominant enterococcal species has been well documented. For
example, newly hatched chicks are colonized by E. faecalis, which tend to
be replaced quickly by E. faecium-like strains, and are subsequently
succeeded by Enterococcus cecorum in adults (Devriese, Hommez,
Wijfels, & Haesebrouck, 1991; Devriese, Laurier, De Herdt, &
Haesebrouck, 1992). Likewise, in cattle, E. faecium and E. faecalis predominate in young calves. These strains, along with a few additional species, persist at reduced numbers as the animals age, but in mature adults Streptococcus
bovis appears to succeed the enterococci as the predominant species in the
intestine. While there is not extensive evidence for strong host-specific
enterococci, it has been reported that ducks preferentially harbor
E. faecalis and pigeons are specifically colonized by Enterococcus columbae. Relatively little is known about the genetic and phenotypic basis for preferential
association of enterococcal species with any of these animal hosts. Although
not shown in Table 4.1, it should also be noted that enterococci of diverse
species can be isolated from the guts of insects and nematodes (Martin &
Mundt, 1972), and the close interactions of these organisms with other
microbes derived from the soil may serve as a conduit for transmission of
antibiotic resistance genes into the enterococci.
While the enterococci have become increasingly important as causative
agents of serious human infection, reports of animal infections attributed to
enterococci are much more sporadic (Table 4.2). Although studies of naturally occurring enterococcal infections in nonhuman hosts are not extensive, it is likely that most diseases of animals and invertebrates ascribed to
enterococci represent opportunistic infections resulting from some
predisposing factor compromising the host immune system. However, it



156

Christopher Staley et al.

should be pointed out that experimental infection models employing
rodents, insects, and worms (Garsin et al., 2001; Mason et al., 2011) have
proven very useful in evaluating the contribution of specific determinants
to the virulence of the bacteria.

2.2. Genetic/genomic analysis of host specificity, virulence,
and drug resistance
Historically, studies of nonhuman, host-associated enterococcal species have
primarily relied on classical microbiological methods, such as microscopy,
growth requirements, and metabolic tests. Since the 1980s, sequencing of
ribosomal genes has been an important means of classification for most
enterococcal species. However, the total number of strains subjected to this
analysis from the less common species groups is still relatively low. Recent
comparative genomic analyses of E. faecium and E. faecalis using ribosomal
gene sequencing, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), and, increasingly,
total genome sequencing (De Leener et al., 2005; Leavis et al., 2004;
McBride et al., 2009; Palmer, Carniol, et al., 2010; Palmer et al., 2012;
Palmer, Kos, et al., 2010) are yielding important insights into the evolution
and ecology of these organisms in different environments, the critical genetic
determinants of commensal and pathogenic lifestyles, and the transmission of
both strains and genes between different niches (Hammerum, 2012; Jensen,
Hammerum, Poulsen, & Westh, 1999).
Recently, Palmer et al. (Palmer, Carniol, et al., 2010; Palmer et al., 2012)
published the results of a comprehensive comparative genome analysis based
on newly generated sequences of 28 enterococcal strains (16 E. faecalis,
8 E. faecium, 3 E. casseliflavus, and 1 E. gallinarum) from diverse clinical
and nonclinical sources, as well as comparisons with previous genome
sequences and MLST analyses. While predominant epidemic clones associated with hospital infections with wide geographic distribution have been
identified for both E. faecalis (Huycke, Spiegel, & Gilmore, 1991; Murray
et al., 1991) and E. faecium (Chow et al., 1993; Heikens, van Schaik,
Leavis, Bonten, & Willems, 2008; Willems et al., 2005), the detailed comparative analysis reported by Palmer et al. revealed interesting differences
between the evolution and genomic organization of the two species.
The individual gene sequences and organization of the core genomes of
all E. faecalis strains, regardless of source, are highly conserved and can be
grouped into a single clade. Intestinal isolates not associated with antibiotic
selective pressure or linked to opportunistic infections carry a minimal
genome with relatively small numbers of mobile elements. This minimal



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

157

genome serves as a platform for evolutionary processes associated with
increased pathogenicity that involve acquisition of multiple mobile elements
including integrated phages, pathogenicity islands, transposons, and plasmids as well as autonomously replicating plasmids. In contrast, the
E. faecium isolates revealed a bimodal distribution of sequence conservation
within the genes comprising the core genome resulting in the grouping of
this species into two major clades, with the epidemic vancomycin-resistant
clinical isolates falling into Clade A and the nonresistant fecal isolates analyzed grouped into Clade B. For both species, it was suggested that integrated mobile elements encoding resistance or virulence genes, along
with flanking core genes, could be transferred horizontally by Hfr-like
mechanisms that had been reported previously for E. faecalis (Manson,
Hancock, & Gilmore, 2010). In the case of E. faecium, this type of transfer
between clades may have generated mosaic genomes comprised primarily of
core genes from one clade, but with “patches” of genes apparently acquired
from the other clade. E. faecalis strains generally carry one or more
CRISPR-cas loci that encode production of small RNAs that can confer
immunity to infection by phages and other mobile elements, whereas these
elements are less common in E. faecium. CRISPR-cas immunity has been
proposed as a mechanism limiting the acquisition of vancomycin resistance
in E. faecalis (Palmer & Gilmore, 2010; Palmer, Kos, et al., 2010). The
cumulative analysis of CRISPR loci carried out by Palmer et al. confirmed
that the probability of specific mobile elements was inversely related to the
presence of CRISPR loci carrying spacer sequences complementary to
these elements. However, in spite of CRISPRs, clinical isolates of both species are enriched for mobile elements, suggesting that they are strongly
selected for during the evolution of virulent, disseminated clones. Interestingly, there is evidence that acquisition of multiple mobile elements, including those conferring vancomycin resistance, may be accompanied by
deletion of segments of mobile elements encoding virulence genes
(Gilmore et al., 2013). It should, however, be kept in mind that the number
of enterococcal genes whose role in pathogenesis have been rigorously
tested is still fairly small, and genes may have different functions in different
hosts. Comparative genomic analyses are likely to inform functional studies
to better define the roles of potential virulence factors, such as cell wall and
capsular polysaccharides and surface protein adhesins, especially in
E. faecium, whose pathogenesis has not been studied as extensively as
E. faecalis. The proteins required for production of these components
may be attractive targets for drug or vaccine development.



158

Christopher Staley et al.

2.3. Transmission of strains and genes between different hosts
One of the main questions being addressed by the comparative genomics
research summarized above is the extent of transmission of enterococcal
strains, mobile elements, and genes encoding antibiotic resistance and virulence traits between strains in different hosts and environments. An area of
particular focus has been transmission from reservoirs associated with the
raising of farm animals to humans, including individuals susceptible to
opportunistic infections in hospitals and other health care facilities. This
has been a particularly active area of investigation for enterococcal
researchers in Europe, who have published numerous studies of the comparative functional genomics of human and animal-associated enterococci.
These research groups have also examined the transfer of antibiotic resistance plasmids in the human and animal intestinal tracts. Much of this work
stemmed from the possible effect of the use of growth-promoting agents
such as avoparcin on the emergence of resistance to critical antimicrobial
agents in human medicine such as vancomycin (Butaye et al., 2000;
Johnsen et al., 2005; Kuhn et al., 2005). As described in detail in an excellent
review (Hammerum, 2012), this work has clearly established that the intestinal tracts of humans and animals serve as suitable environments for conjugative transfer of resistance elements (Bourgeois-Nicolaos, Moubareck,
Mangeney, Butel, & Doucet-Populaire, 2006; Lester, Frimodt-Møller,
Sørensen, Monnet, & Hammerum, 2006), and there is substantial evidence
for the movement of specific resistance determinants of animal origin into
human strains (Jensen, 1998).
Comparative genomic analyses based mostly on MLST of E. faecium have
identified some strains isolated from humans that resemble the predominant
clonal complexes from farm animals (Freitas et al., 2011). However, the
most abundant sequence types of human origin are distinct from those of
animal origin. Thus the transmission of both strains and mobile elements
between the human and animal reservoirs clearly occurs, but the frequency
of such transmission may be relatively low. This does not imply that these
transmissions are not clinically and evolutionarily significant, given the tremendous selective pressures operative in both human medicine and modern
agriculture.
The analytical tools and insights that have been derived from the comparative genomics of human and animal-associated enterococci provide a
great foundation for more extensive studies of enterococci from environmental sources, discussed in the following sections.



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

159

3. ENTEROCOCCI IN EXTRA-ENTERIC HABITATS
Enterococci have been detected in a variety of extra-intestinal habitats
and are believed to have originated from animal sources from fecal pollution.
Once introduced to secondary, environmental habitats, the ability of enterococci to grow and the mechanisms by which enterococci are transmitted
vary depending on characteristics of the habitat that may afford protection
from ecological stressors (Table 4.3). Methods of enumeration vary as a
result of matrix type (e.g., different methods of elutriation from soils and sediment have been used) as well as culture method [e.g., most probable number (MPN) or colony forming units (CFU) in various media] depending
upon the availability of various media at the time of the study. To maintain
accuracy, units presented below are those from original reports and may not
be directly comparable between studies employing differing methods of
enumeration.

3.1. Soil
Enterococci are known to occur in a variety of soil types in tropical and temperate climates (Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012; Desmarais et al., 2002;
Fujioka et al., 1999; Mundt, 1961; Ran et al., 2013). An early study of
enterococci in soils found that, when detected, concentrations ranged from
approximately 101 to 103 MPN g1 of soil, and suggested that dispersal of
enterococci could be attributed to effects of wind, gravity, and rain
(Mundt, 1961). In a soil study done in Guam, that included enumeration
of enterococci at varying depths, enterococci were found to be most numerous in surface soils (approximately 700 MPN 100 g1) with concentrations
dropping to 20–60 MPN 100 g1 at depths of 18 and 36 cm (Fujioka et al.,
1999), and these results were similar to an earlier study conducted in Hawaii
(Hardina & Fujioka, 1991). More recently, a mean of approximately
103 MPN 100 g1 of enterococci was reported in seven Hawaiian soil types,
and showed no significant variation in concentration due to soil type
(Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012). In a Florida study done along a river
bank, enterococci were detected at concentrations <102 cells g1 with little
variability (Desmarais et al., 2002). In the same study, enterococci were also
detected in remote soils at highly variable concentrations (>103 cells g1 to
<101 cells g1). Finally, enterococci were detected in soil samples near Lake
Superior at concentrations ranging from approximately 103 to 105 MPN



Table 4.3 Distribution, growth, and transport mechanisms of enterococci in extra-enteric habitats
Environmental
Habitat
Distribution
Growth
transport
References

Soil

Tropical and temperate soils Possible if indigenous microbiota Wind
are inhibited
Gravity
Highest concentrations
Precipitation
found in surface soils

Byappanahalli and Fujioka (2004),
Byappanahalli, Roll, and Fujioka
(2012), Desmarais, Solo-Gabriele, and
Palmer (2002), Fujioka and
Byappanahalli (2001), Fujioka et al.
(1999), Mundt (1961), Ran et al.
(2013)

Sediment

Ubiquitous in surface
sediments
Undetectable at depth
>5 cm

Suggested but not demonstrated Sediment
resuspension
Precipitation

Ferguson, Moore, Getrich, and
Zhowandai (2005), Gary and Adams
(1985), Le Fevre and Lewis (2003),
Obiri-Danso and Jones (2000), Staley,
Reckhow, Lukasik, and Harwood
(2012)

River flow
Lake currents
Precipitation

Byappanahalli, Shively, Nevers,
Sadowsky, and Whitman (2003),
Fujioka, Sian-Denton, Borja, Castro,
and Morphew (1999), Haack, Fogarty,
and Wright (2003), Jenkins, Scott,
Morgan, and Rose (2005), Knee,
Layton, Street, Boehm, and Paytan
(2008), Ran, Badgley, Dillon, Dunny,
and Sadowsky (2013), Staley et al.
(2012)

Freshwater Tropical and temperate
waters

Unlikely, but may occur
sporadically in the presence of
excess nutrients



Boehm et al. (2002), Korajkic, Badgley,
Brownell, and Harwood (2009),
Korajkic, Brownell, and Harwood
(2011), Shibata, Solo-Gabriele,
Fleming, and Elmir (2004)

Unlikely

Wave action
Precipitation

Beach sand Tropical and temperate
sands
Higher concentrations in
surface sand and nearer to
shoreline

Demonstrated in vitro

Tidal washing Byappanahalli et al. (2006), Halliday
Precipitation and Gast (2011), Hartz et al. (2008),
Phillips, Solo-Gabriele, Piggot, Klaus,
and Zhang (2011), Yamahara, Layton,
Santoro, and Boehm (2007)

Vegetation Patchy distribution on
terrestrial plants
High concentrations in
submerged vegetation

Unlikely on terrestrial vegetation Wind
Possible on aquatic vegetation
Gravity
Water current
Wave action

Marine
water

Tropical and temperate
waters
Higher concentration in
nearshore waters
Low to undetectable
concentrations in offshore
waters

Anderson, Turner, and Lewis (1997),
Badgley, Nayak, and Harwood (2010),
Badgley, Thomas, et al. (2010),
Imamura, Thompson, Boehm, and Jay
(2011), Muller et al. (2001), Mundt
(1961, 1963b), Ott et al. (2001), Staley
et al. (2012), Whitman et al. (2003)



162

Christopher Staley et al.

100 g1, and concentrations were positively correlated with soil temperature (Ran et al., 2013).
3.1.1 Persistence and survival in soils
Enterococci derived from sewage contamination are able to persist for
extended periods of time in a variety of soil types and may constitute a
minority of the indigenous microbial assemblage of soils in tropical climates
(Byappanahalli & Fujioka, 2004; Mallmann & Litsky, 1951). An early study
tested the persistence of enterococci from sewage or sludge in a sandy loam
soil in lysimeters maintained outside in a temperate climate (Mallmann &
Litsky, 1951). The study demonstrated that enterococci from sewage
declined to undetectable levels after 14 days in 100 g samples. When sludge
was mixed with soil, the enterococci persisted for 70 days declining by two
orders of magnitude—the authors suggest that the presence of organic matter from the sludge facilitated survival (Mallmann & Litsky, 1951).
Enterococci are also able to survive in tropical soil environments,
although the environment is suboptimal and growth is limited by competition for nutrients with the indigenous microbiota (Byappanahalli & Fujioka,
2004; Fujioka & Byappanahalli, 2001). While gram-negative bacteria, such
as Escherichia coli, tend to be susceptible to the moisture content of soils
(declining with lower moisture), enterococci have been shown to maintain
relatively consistent concentrations in tropical soil as moisture decreased
from 35% to 11% (Byappanahalli & Fujioka, 2004).
3.1.2 Growth in soils
In addition to persistence, enterococci are able to grow in soils when indigenous microorganisms are inhibited or eliminated (Byappanahalli & Fujioka,
2004; Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012). Inhibition of indigenous microorganisms with bile salts has been shown to promote the growth of E. coli in
soils with concentrations increasing by nearly three orders of magnitude
(Byappanahalli & Fujioka, 2004). While enterococci were not measured
in the bile salts experiment, it is likely that a similar increase in concentration
would occur if the indigenous soil assemblage is inhibited. For example,
when sewage-contaminated soil was mixed 1:10 (wt/wt) with autoclaved
stream bank soil, enterococci concentrations increased nearly 100-fold over
4 days (Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012).
3.1.3 Population genetics in soils
Speciation of enterococci from soils has revealed that as many as eight different species may be present and that strains are metabolically diverse



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

163

(Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012; Ran et al., 2013). In temperate soils from
two locations, eight species were identified including E. faecalis, E. faecium,
E. casseliflavus, E. hirae, E. mundtii, E. gallinarum, E. durans, and E. avium, and
the dominant species varied by sampling site (Ran et al., 2013). In contrast,
in temperate soils, E. hirae and E. mundtii were not identified (Byappanahalli,
Roll, et al., 2012). Among 227 E. faecalis isolates identified in temperate soils
over 4 months, 46 distinct genotypes were identified by DNA fingerprinting
(Ran et al., 2013). Isolates having one of eight genotypes were identified
during multiple months of the study period, and these isolates clustered
together, accounted for 52% of total isolates, and were suggested to represent
a group of persistent E. faecalis strains.

3.2. Sediment
Both freshwater and marine sediments are globally established, extra-enteric
reservoirs of enterococci (Ferguson et al., 2005; Gary & Adams, 1985; Le
Fevre & Lewis, 2003; Obiri-Danso & Jones, 2000; Staley et al., 2012). Concentrations of enterococci in freshwater stream and lake sediments have been
reported at concentrations ranging from 101 to 104 CFU 100 g1, and disturbance of sediment in both biomes has resulted in significant increases in
enterococci concentrations in the water (Gary & Adams, 1985; Staley et al.,
2012). These studies suggest that enterococci adsorb to sediment particles
and are able to be resuspended in the water column upon disturbance. Furthermore, exposure to fecal contamination has been shown to result in concentrations of enterococci 100-fold greater than when the same site was
unimpacted (Gary & Adams, 1985).
Concentrations of enterococci have also been shown to be highly variable with sediments acting as sinks of enterococci from a variety of input
sources (Ferguson et al., 2005; Le Fevre & Lewis, 2003; Obiri-Danso &
Jones, 2000). Enterococci in intertidal sediments at three sites in northwest
England were on the order of 101–102 CFU g1 and fluctuated very little in
response to tidal cover (Obiri-Danso & Jones, 2000). At one site in this
study, significantly greater enterococci were present in sediments during
winter months compared to summer, although no seasonal variability was
detected at the other two. Enterococci concentrations in sediments have
been shown to increase in response to discharges from sources including
wastewater treatment plants, streams, and stormwater (Ferguson et al.,
2005; Le Fevre & Lewis, 2003; Obiri-Danso & Jones, 2000).
Rainfall was also shown to increase enterococcal concentrations in sediments (Le Fevre & Lewis, 2003), and the authors suggest that deposition of



164

Christopher Staley et al.

enterococci in the sediment was a major mechanism of their removal from
the water column. Furthermore, wave action resulted in resuspension of
enterococci from sediment indicating an interaction between populations
of enterococci and the overlaying water column (Ferguson et al., 2005;
Le Fevre & Lewis, 2003).
3.2.1 Persistence and survival in sediments
Enterococci maintain relatively low, yet stable, concentrations in sediments
and generally persist at greater concentrations than do other FIB (Sayler,
Nelson, Justice, & Colwell, 1975). Analysis of sediment depth revealed that
enterococci persist at higher numbers in surface sediments and are generally
undetectable below 5 cm (Obiri-Danso & Jones, 2000). Furthermore,
enterococci tend to persist longer in sediments than the overlaying water
column, although in mesocosm studies, decay rates of inoculated enterococci in sediments and either freshwater or saltwater did not differ significantly (Anderson, Whitlock, & Harwood, 2005). Decay rates of
enterococci in both marine and freshwater sediments are generally less than
those for E. coli (Davies, Long, Donald, & Ashbolt, 1995; Lee et al., 2006).
Furthermore, the extent of reduction in enterococci concentration is generally less in freshwater sediment (one order of magnitude) than in marine
sediment (up to two to three orders of magnitude) (Davies et al., 1995).
3.2.2 Growth in sediments
Growth of enterococci in both freshwater and marine sediments has been
suggested (Desmarais et al., 2002; Ferguson et al., 2005; Gary & Adams,
1985). In freshwater streams, downstream waters harbored 1.1–19.5-fold
greater enterococci concentrations than those upstream, and the increase
was attributed to growth and resuspension of enterococci from sediments
(Gary & Adams, 1985). Addition of larger amounts of sterile sediment to river
water resulted in more rapid increase and greater enterococci concentrations
further suggesting that sediments support growth of enterococci (Desmarais
et al., 2002). Consistently high concentrations of enterococci in marine sediments (104–106 CFU 100 g1) have also been suggested to imply growth
(Ferguson et al., 2005). While it seems likely that under certain conditions
enterococci are capable of growth in sediment, further study is necessary
to assess growth dynamics of these species in sediments.
3.2.3 Population genetics in sediments
E. faecalis and E. faecium have been reported to be among the most abundant
species of enterococci in marine and intertidal sediments (Ferguson et al.,



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

165

2005). Other species identified in these sediments and the overlaying water
include E. hirae, E. casseliflavus, E. mundtii, and to a lesser extent
E. gallinarum, E. durans, and E. avium. These species were also identified
in sediments from Lake Superior, and temporal shifts in their relative abundance were observed with no discernible trend (Ran et al., 2013).

3.3. Freshwater
Enterococci have long been used as indicators of fecal contamination in
ambient and recreational fresh waters (United States Environmental
Protection Agency, 1986); however, environmental reservoirs such as sediments (Gary & Adams, 1985; Staley et al., 2012) or vegetation (Whitman
et al., 2003) may also contribute enterococci in freshwater systems. Both
temperate and tropical freshwater bodies have been shown to harbor
populations of enterococci (Byappanahalli et al., 2003; Fujioka et al.,
1999; Haack et al., 2003; Jenkins et al., 2005; Knee et al., 2008; Ran
et al., 2013; Staley et al., 2012). Enumeration of Enterococcus spp. from
streams in Guam revealed their presence in 88.5% of samples, at concentrations on the order of 103 CFU 100 ml1 (Fujioka et al., 1999). Moreover,
about 104 CFU enterococci per 100 ml were reported in a freshwater lake in
Florida (Staley et al., 2012). Concentrations of enterococci in temperate
lakes and rivers are generally lower and rarely exceed 103 CFU per
100 ml (Jenkins et al., 2005; Ran et al., 2013), but may be elevated in
response to meteorological events (Haack et al., 2003).
3.3.1 Persistence and survival in freshwater
Variable persistence and survival patterns have been observed for enterococci in freshwater as a result of inoculum source and seasonality
(Anderson et al., 2005; Sinton, Hall, Lynch, & Davies-Colley, 2002).
Enterococci inoculated from waste stabilization pond (WSP) effluent
showed faster decay rates when inoculated in river water mesocosms
[90% reduction (T90) in 3 h] than enterococci from raw sewage
(T90 ¼ 6.4 h) when exposed to natural sunlight during the summer
(Sinton et al., 2002). In winter, however, enterococci from WSP effluent
persisted longer (T90 ¼ 14.5 h) compared to the inoculum from sewage
(T90 ¼ 12.6 h). Decay of enterococci from contaminated soil, wastewater,
and dog feces was also tested in freshwater mesocosms (Anderson et al.,
2005). Enterococci from wastewater showed the smallest decay rate
(0.31 log10 CFU 100 ml1 per day) while those from dog feces decayed
fastest (1.49 log10 CFU 100 ml1 per day). The authors, however, noted



166

Christopher Staley et al.

differences in inoculum amount and organic carbon that may have
influenced decay.
3.3.2 Growth in freshwater
Enterococcus spp. strains are generally regarded as commensal bacteria and are
expected to decay in the environment as a result of stressors (see Section 4).
Freshwater habitats generally do not support the growth of enterococci,
where their presence is generally regarded as evidence of point or nonpoint
source pollution and/or resuspension from environmental reservoirs
(Byappanahalli, Nevers, et al., 2012). Recent investigation of the association
of enterococci with Cladophora, however, suggests that decomposition of
aquatic vegetation may provide nutrients suitable to support intermittent
growth of enterococci (Byappanahalli et al., 2003). It is possible that in
the presence of other nutrient-rich inputs, enterococci may show shortlived periods of growth, however, this has yet to be demonstrated.
3.3.3 Population genetics in freshwater
The population structure of enterococci has been shown to be highly variable at a variety of freshwater sites regardless of season (Badgley, Nayak,
et al., 2010). E. casseliflavus, E. faecalis, E. faecium, E. hirae, and E. mundtii
were isolated from rivers and lakes, but the sample size was not large enough
to determine relative abundance of these species in samples (Badgley, Nayak,
et al., 2010). The source(s) of fecal contamination as well as environmental
reservoirs contributing enterococci to the water column have been shown to
greatly influence the strains present (Ahmed & Katouli, 2008). In a study of
six catchments in Southeastern Queensland, Australia, biochemical fingerprinting of approximately 4000 enterococci isolates revealed that roughly
95% matched fingerprints from a host library of isolates from 10 animal
sources suggesting that the majority of the population was of fecal origin
(Ahmed & Katouli, 2008). In mesocosm studies containing water, sediment,
and submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV), however, a single strain of
E. casseliflavus accounted for 96.5% of all enterococci types (Badgley,
Thomas, et al., 2010). This result suggests that potentially naturalized
populations persisting in environmental reservoirs may help structure the
enterococci population in the water column in the absence of fecal inputs.

3.4. Marine water
Enterococci are also known to be widely distributed in estuarine and marine
waters and generally do not exceed densities on the order of 103 CFU



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

167

100 ml1, even with evidence of fecal contamination (Boehm et al., 2002;
Korajkic et al., 2009, 2011; Shibata et al., 2004). Concentrations of enterococci in the surf zone have been demonstrated to display diurnal variability
with concentrations declining in the middle of the day and rebounding at
night (Boehm et al., 2002). Furthermore, this study also demonstrated that
enterococci exhibit shorter term variability in concentrations as a result of
transport by wave action (Boehm et al., 2002). Enterococci concentrations
have been reported to be greatest during high tide and are spatially variable
along the same shoreline (Shibata et al., 2004). However, concentrations of
enterococci in offshore waters are generally lower than those at the shoreline
and may be undetectable (Shibata et al., 2004).
3.4.1 Persistence and survival in marine waters
Similar to observations in freshwater (see Section 3.3.1), the survival of
enterococci in estuarine and marine waters varies as a result of exposure
to sunlight, temperature, and inoculation source (Anderson et al., 2005;
Lessard & Sieburth, 1983). Enterococci from sewage had T90 of 29 and
122 h when observed in diffusion chambers maintained in an estuary and
salt marsh, respectively, and decay rates were significantly correlated with
temperature (i.e., faster decay at higher temperature) (Lessard & Sieburth,
1983). In the same study, decay rates of enterococci in diffusion chambers
were not related to light exposure or intensity; however, in batch chambers,
enterococci in dark chambers survived longer than those exposed to light
(Lessard & Sieburth, 1983). In separate mesocosm studies, enterococci inoculated from contaminated soils persisted longer than enterococci from
wastewater and much longer than those from dog feces (decay rates of
0.99, 1.05, and 4.2 log10 CFU 100 ml1 per day, respectively)
(Anderson et al., 2005).
3.4.2 Growth in marine waters
Enterococci have been suggested to be incapable of growth in ambient
marine waters based on the results of mesocosm experiments (Boehm
et al., 2002). This suggestion is supported by the observation that enterococci were undetectable in offshore marine waters (Shibata et al., 2004).
However, enterococci may be continually introduced to marine waters
by pollution sources and reservoirs in or near the surf zone (Boehm et al.,
2002; Grant et al., 2001). Beach sands (see Section 3.5) and vegetation
(see Section 3.6) have been implicated as potential reservoirs and habitats



168

Christopher Staley et al.

supporting growth of enterococci from which the bacteria may be
resuspended in marine waters (Imamura et al., 2011; Yamahara et al., 2007).
3.4.3 Population genetics in marine waters
The structure of enterococci populations in estuarine and marine waters has
not been studied extensively. Diversity of the Enterococcus population has
been shown to increase during wet weather conditions as determined by
genetic fingerprinting (Shannon–Weiner indices of 1.88 and 2.65 for dry
and wet conditions, respectively) (Brownell et al., 2007). A similar study
found that diversity did not display any seasonal trend (Badgley, Nayak,
et al., 2010). Furthermore, a large proportion of strains typed in this study
were only isolated during a single season over a year-long sampling period
(Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010). Species identified as E. casseliflavus, E. faecalis,
E. faecium, E. hirae, and E. mundtii were suggested to have a relatively cosmopolitan distribution across a variety of water types and matrices (i.e.,
water, sediment, and vegetation) implying the likely presence of these species in estuarine and marine waters (Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010).

3.5. Beach sand
Both freshwater and marine beach sands harbor populations of enterococci
(Byappanahalli et al., 2006; Halliday & Gast, 2011; Hartz et al., 2008; Phillips
et al., 2011; Yamahara et al., 2007). Concentrations of enterococci range
from 102 to 106 CFU 100 g1 depending on the location and type of sand
sampled (Halliday & Gast, 2011). While temporal variability of enterococci
densities has been observed, seasonal trends influencing Enterococcus concentrations in sand have not been demonstrated (Byappanahalli et al., 2006).
Exposed sand, however, has been shown to harbor higher densities of
enterococci than submerged sand and concentrations were higher near
the high tide mark (Phillips et al., 2011; Yamahara et al., 2007). In a separate
study, however, concentrations of enterococci were shown to decline with
distance (10–20 m) from the shoreline (Hartz et al., 2008). Factors such as
tide, degree of wave shelter, current, groundwater, and surrounding land
use are among parameters that have been suggested to affect the distribution
of enterococci in sands (Halliday & Gast, 2011; Yamahara et al., 2007).
3.5.1 Persistence and survival in beach sand
Persistence of enterococci in natural beach sands has been demonstrated for
freshwater and marine beaches (Byappanahalli et al., 2006; Hartz et al.,
2008). Enterococci could be detected for over a year in backshore,



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

169

freshwater beach sand collected 20 m from the shoreline near groundwater
(Byappanahalli et al., 2006). In addition, in mesocosm experiments using
natural marine beach sand, enterococci were shown to survive for up to
2 weeks (the duration of the study) (Hartz et al., 2008). A comparison of
gentle shaking versus intense shaking was also performed in this study to
assess differences in free-living versus tightly attached enterococci, respectively. Approximately 4-times more enterococci were found to be tightly
attached to wet sand compared to free, and in dry sand, approximately
64-times more enterococci were tightly attached (Hartz et al., 2008). These
findings and the nearly ubiquitous detection of enterococci from beach sand
samples in California and southern Florida highly suggest the capability of
enterococci to survive in sands (Phillips et al., 2011; Yamahara et al., 2007).
3.5.2 Growth in beach sand
The persistence of enterococci in natural sand samples, often at relatively
high concentrations, indicates that growth may be supported in many types
of beach sand (Halliday & Gast, 2011). In mesocosm studies of sterile sand,
enterococci concentrations (inoculated from natural populations) were
found to increase by two orders of magnitude within the first 3 days, and
elevated temperature sped the rate of increase (Hartz et al., 2008). Furthermore, when enterococci cultured from human feces were used as the inoculum, similar growth was observed. When natural beach sand (without
sterilization) was used in mesocosms, however, growth was not observed
and this is suspected to be due to competition with the indigenous sand community as well as predation (Hartz et al., 2008). While growth of enterococci
in sand seems likely, particularly following wetting due to tidal influence or
precipitation, the paucity of in situ growth studies leaves this conclusion
somewhat speculative.
3.5.3 Population genetics in beach sand
E. faecium has been reported to be the primary species associated with freshwater beach sands (92% of confirmed Enterococcus isolates) with E. casseliflavus
and E. durans also present in low proportions (Byappanahalli et al., 2006).
E. faecalis and E. hirae were found to be the predominant species in another
study of shoreline and nearshore sand on Lake Superior, with E. mundtii and
E. avium also identified in some samples (Ran et al., 2013). The species distribution of enterococci varied temporally as well as by location showing no
clear trends (Ran et al., 2013). The enterococcal surface protein (esp) gene of
E. faecium was detected in sand samples along the coast of California



170

Christopher Staley et al.

suggesting the presence of this species in marine beach sands, as well as a
human source (Yamahara et al., 2007). To date, the population structure
of enterococci in estuarine and marine beach sands remains relatively
understudied.

3.6. Vegetation
Terrestrial vegetation (e.g., flowering plants and forage crops) has long been
known to harbor populations of enterococci (Muller et al., 2001; Mundt,
1961, 1963b; Ott et al., 2001). Among the first studies of epiphytic enterococci on plants, enterococci were found on between 28.1% and 95.6% of
varying parts of corn flowers and on 65.8% of corn over a two and a half month
period (Mundt, 1961). Concentrations were reported as high as
3.0  105 MPN g1, and enterococci were presumed to be deposited on
plants via insect and wind dispersal (Mundt, 1961). In a subsequent study,
enterococci were found on 14% of flowers in an area with minimal human
contact, and detection was positively correlated with temperature and negatively correlated with canopy cover and elevation (Mundt, 1963b). Epiphytic
enterococci have also been isolated from forage grass at concentrations of
about 101–104 CFU g1 (Muller et al., 2001; Ott et al., 2001).
More recently, aquatic vegetation including algae, wrack (seaweed), and
SAV have received attention as reservoirs of enterococci that facilitate the
persistence of populations in the water column (Anderson et al., 1997;
Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010; Badgley, Thomas, et al., 2010; Imamura
et al., 2011; Staley et al., 2012; Whitman et al., 2003). Cladophora mats have
been reported to contain high concentrations of enterococci (mean of
4.8 log10 CFU g1), but concentrations were highly variable ranging from
<101 to nearly 106 CFU g1 depending on the site sampled (Whitman et al.,
2003). In a study in New Zealand, decaying seaweed was found to harbor
enterococci concentrations two to four orders of magnitude greater than
that found in nearby seawater (Anderson et al., 1997). A similar study of
beach wrack found that dry wrack supported significantly higher densities
of enterococci (103–104 CFU g1) than wet wrack (101–102 CFU g1),
which also had higher concentrations than wrack in the surf
(<101 CFU g1) (Imamura et al., 2011). SAV (primarily Hydrilla) has also
been shown to sustain higher Enterococcus densities than sediment (see
Section 3.2) ranging from 102 to 104 CFU 100 g1 with lower concentrations in estuarine waters versus freshwater (Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010;
Staley et al., 2012).



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

171

3.6.1 Persistence and survival in vegetation
While survival of enterococci on terrestrial vegetation has remained relatively understudied, Enterococcus spp. have been shown to persist for several
days to several months on dried algae or SAV (Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010;
Badgley, Thomas, et al., 2010; Whitman et al., 2003). Cladophora mat thickness contributes to extended survival of higher concentrations of enterococci
and reduces the magnitude of initial decline of the population when mats are
exposed to direct sunlight following removal from the water (Byappanahalli
et al., 2006). Regardless of mat thickness (ranging from 1 to 6 mm), enterococci remained detectable after 4 days representing 28 h exposure to sunlight.
Enterococci on SAV have been shown to survive in freshwater mesocosms
for a period of 2 weeks, although elevated temperature and light intensity
resulted in more highly variable concentrations of enterococci during the
2-week interval (Badgley, Thomas, et al., 2010). In a similar study, enterococci were also enumerated from SAV over a year-long sampling period from
a variety of freshwater and estuarine sights suggesting in situ persistence,
although the possibility of reinoculation of SAV from other sources could
not be excluded (Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010).
3.6.2 Growth in vegetation
Aquatic vegetation has been described as a permissive habitat able to support
the growth of enterococci (Byappanahalli et al., 2003). The most convincing
evidence of enterococcal growth on aquatic vegetation was observed in
studies of Cladophora in which sun-dried algae stored for 6 months supported
growth of enterococci to a density of 107 CFU g1 (Whitman et al., 2003).
Furthermore, enterococci were shown to grow on Cladophora leachate
exhibiting a similar growth profile to that observed on microbiological
media (Byappanahalli et al., 2003). The possibility of growth on SAV
remains more speculative, but has also been suggested based on higher concentrations of enterococci in SAV compared to either sediment or the water
column in addition to the previous observations of growth on Cladophora
(Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010). This hypothesis is also supported by the
observation of a highly clonal population of E. casseliflavus in mesocosms
containing SAV and water from a freshwater Florida lake, suggesting replication of the strain within the mesocosms (Badgley, Thomas, et al., 2010).
3.6.3 Population genetics in vegetation
Earlier work characterizing enterococci recovered from the phyllosphere
was limited to species identification (Muller et al., 2001; Ott et al., 2001).



172

Christopher Staley et al.

In these studies, only a minority of epiphytic enterococci could be assigned
to known species including E. faecalis, E. mundtii, E. casseliflavus, E. faecium,
and Enterococcus sulfureus (Muller et al., 2001; Ott et al., 2001). In these studies, however, a majority of isolates (69.7% in Ott et al., 2001) shared a similar
16S rDNA genotype (genotype VI) that was found to be most similar to that
of E. faecalis. This finding is similar to later work on SAV (primarily Hydrilla)
which appeared to support a highly clonal population of E. casseliflavus
(Badgley, Nayak, et al., 2010). These findings suggest that Enterococcus
populations on vegetation may be dominated by naturalized strains capable
of extended persistence and potentially growth on in these habitats.

4. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE ECOLOGY OF
ENTEROCOCCI IN EXTRA-ENTERIC HABITATS
In most extra-enteric environments, the growth and often the persistence of enterococci are generally limited as a result of abiotic as well as
biotic stressors (Byappanahalli, Nevers, et al., 2012). While many of these
environments, such as soil, sediment, sand, and vegetation provide some
protection from many of the abiotic stressors (e.g., sunlight and salinity),
competition for nutrients with and predation by indigenous microorganisms
in these environments often limits the success of enterococci in secondary
habitats. Furthermore, interaction of these stressors may enhance the decay
of enterococci in less protected habitats (Table 4.4). Even given these limitations, however, certain strains of enterococci have been successful at establishing seemingly naturalized populations that generally constitute a
minority of the bacterial community in these environments (discussed in
Section 3).

4.1. Sunlight
The bactericidal effect of sunlight on enterococci in various water types has
been well established and investigated under a variety of experimental conditions (Fujioka et al, 1981; Kay et al., 2005; Noble et al., 2004; Sinton et al.,
1994; Sinton et al., 2002). In addition to solar irradiation intensity (Noble
et al., 2004; Sinton et al., 1994), the predominant factors affecting the decay
of enterococci include salinity (i.e., fresh or marine waters) (Fujioka et al.,
1981; Sinton et al., 2002), temperature (Noble et al., 2004; Sinton et al.,
1994, 2002), and inoculation source (Fujioka et al., 1981; Sinton et al.,
2002). Other parameters such as the physiochemical parameters of the water
have been shown to significantly impact decay rates as well (Kay et al., 2005).



173

Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

Table 4.4 Primary ecological stressors of enterococci and interaction with other
environmental parameters
Stressor
Interaction with other factors
References

Sunlight

Fujioka, Hashimoto, Siwak, and
More rapid decay as salinity
Young (1981), Kay et al. (2005),
increases
Noble, Lee, and Schiff (2004),
More rapid decay at higher
Sinton, Daviescolley, and Bell
temperature
(1994), Sinton et al. (2002)
Differential decay rates of
enterococci from various sources
Increased turbidity and suspended
solids may provide protection
from sunlight

Salinity

Differential decay rates of
Anderson et al. (2005), Carr,
enterococci from various sources Wang, McLean, Flood, and
Ellender (2010), Davies et al.
(1995), Dorsey, Carter, Bergquist,
and Sagarin (2010), Kay et al.
(2005), Sinton et al. (2002), Viau
et al. (2011)

Starvation Decay may be faster at elevated
temperature
Species-specific differences in
response

Heim, Lleo, Bonato, Guzman, and
Canepari (2002), Lleò, Bonato,
Benedetti, and Canepari (2005),
Lleò et al. (2001), Lleò, Tafi, and
Canepari (1998)

Predation Potentially affected by water type Boehm, Keymer, and
(e.g., fresh vs. marine waters)
Shellenbarger (2005), Davies et al.
(1995), Menon, Billen, and Servais
(2003), Purnell, Ebdon, and Taylor
(2011), Surbeck, Jiang, and Grant
(2010), Wanjugi and Harwood
(2013)

The decay rates of enterococci and the extent to which these factors are
shown to interact and influence rates of inactivation vary. Decay rates, however, often depend on the experimental design and the geographic location
of the study.
4.1.1 Inactivation of enterococci in varying water types
Decay of enterococci in estuarine and marine waters is often reported to be
more rapid than in freshwater (Fujioka et al., 1981; Sinton et al., 2002). In a
Hawaii mesocosm study, the T90 (time required for 90% inactivation) of



174

Christopher Staley et al.

enterococci from diluted sewage inocula was between 60 and 180 min in
seawater and phosphate-buffered saline, and enterococci were completely
inactivated after 3 h. In contrast, however, in freshwater only 55% of enterococci from the initial inoculum were inactivated after 3 h (Fujioka et al.,
1981). Inactivation of enterococci was also shown to be more rapid in seawater compared to fresh water or a 50:50 mix of both under cloudy and clear
conditions, when either raw sewage or WSP effluent was used as an inoculation source (Sinton et al., 2002). Conversely, when seawater and freshwater mesocosms were compared in a separate California study, under both
low (winter) and high (summer) solar irradiation, differences in decay
between water types were not significant under either condition (Noble
et al., 2004). In this experiment, however, the intensity of solar irradiation
significantly affected decay: under low solar irradiation, enterococci T90
values were 9.46 h in both water types compared to 8.95 and 8.45 h in seawater and freshwater, respectively, under high solar irradiation.
4.1.2 Impact of temperature on enterococci inactivation rates
Higher temperatures also generally result in more rapid decay of enterococci
than cooler temperatures (Noble et al., 2004; Sinton et al., 1994, 2002).
A series of experiments in New Zealand assessing decay of enterococci from
sewage and meatwork effluents in seawater found significantly faster decay of
enterococci in both effluent types in the summer versus winter, with no significant differences between effluent sources (mean T90 ¼ 6.4 and 5.2 h in
summer, respective to effluent type vs. T90 ¼ 12.0 and 7.3 h in winter)
(Sinton et al., 1994). A similar observation was observed using WSP effluent
and sewage inoculated in river water with summer T90 ¼ 3.0 and 6.4 h,
respectively, compared to winter T90 ¼ 14.5 and 12.6 h (Sinton et al.,
2002). Faster decay of enterococci was also observed at higher temperatures
(20  C vs. 14  C, summer vs. winter water temperature) in seawater mesocosms in California inoculated with sewage effluent or influent (Noble et al.,
2004). In the experiments described above, higher temperatures were a
result of seasonality, which likely also resulted in concurrent increase in solar
irradiation. The association between decay rate and temperature, however,
has also been demonstrated in dark experiments (Sinton et al., 1994, 2002).
4.1.3 Inactivation of enterococci from varying inoculum types
The rate of inactivation of enterococci when exposed to sunlight is variable
based on the type of inoculum or pollution source, and in some cases, may be
related to combined effects of seasonality and water type (Fujioka et al.,
1981; Korajkic et al., 2013; Sinton et al., 1994, 2002). In a Hawaiian



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

175

mesocosm study, enterococci from humans (sewage), chicken, and cattle
fecal samples were found to show similar decay rates in seawater, although
the enterococci from sewage were slightly more resistant to inactivation
(Fujioka et al., 1981). In studies performed in New Zealand, enterococci
from sewage exhibited a slower decay than those from WSP effluent in fresh
(river) water when exposed to sunlight (Sinton et al., 2002); however, this
was only observed during summer months. In a winter study, enterococci
from sewage and WSP effluent showed similar decay rates. Similarly, enterococci from wastewater influent, effluent, and untreated urban runoff showed
similar decay rates in a California study, and the initial concentration of
enterococci also did not affect inactivation rate (Noble et al., 2004).
Recently, a study comparing decay of enterococci from either sewage effluent or composite cow manure samples found that enterococci from cow
manure persisted significantly longer in freshwater than did those from sewage, but the effect of inoculum source on decay was not significant in marine
water (Korajkic et al., 2013). The findings of these studies suggest an interaction among water type, inoculation source, and season influencing the
overall inactivation rate of enterococci exposed to sunlight.
4.1.4 Contribution of physicochemical parameters to inactivation
of enterococci
Several studies have investigated how physicochemical characteristics of water
samples such as nutrient content, total suspended solids (TSS), and turbidity
contribute to enterococcal decay in sunlight (Noble et al., 2004). In a California mesocosm study, nutrient content (NO3, NO2, PO4, SiO4, and
NH4 þ ) and TSS concentrations were manipulated to simulate ambient conditions versus those experienced as a result of runoff contribution to seawater.
Neither condition, however, was found to significantly influence inactivation
rates of enterococci (Noble et al., 2004). In the same study, TSS concentrations also did not impact decay rates of enterococci in freshwater. Conversely,
in estuarine and coastal waters collected in the southwest of the United Kingdom, turbidity and suspended solids concentration in the water were correlated with T90 values indicating less rapid inactivation at higher turbidity and
greater suspended solids (Kay et al., 2005). Salinity, conductivity, and total dissolved solids were negatively correlated with T90 in the same study.

4.2. Salinity
While the enterococci are characterized by the ability to grow at elevated salt
concentrations (6.5% NaCl), several mesocosm studies have documented a
detrimental effect of salinity on survival of enterococci in a variety of



176

Christopher Staley et al.

matrices (Anderson et al., 2005; Davies et al., 1995; Kay et al., 2005; Sinton
et al., 2002). In microcosm survival studies, enterococci concentrations in
marine sediments declined one to two orders of magnitude more than
the decline observed in freshwater sediments (Davies et al., 1995).
A separate set of mesocosm experiments assessing enterococci survival from
dog feces, wastewater, and contaminated soils also showed a decline at least
twice as rapid in marine water and sediments compared to either matrix in
freshwater (Anderson et al., 2005). Enterococci from either raw sewage or
WSP effluent showed faster inactivation rates in seawater versus freshwater
in a New Zealand study, as well (Sinton et al., 2002). Similarly, T90 values of
enterococci from sewage were negatively correlated with salinity when
inoculated in ambient estuarine to marine waters (salinities ranging from
6.0% to 40.3%) indicating that salinity was contributing to more rapid inactivation of the organisms (Kay et al., 2005).
In situ effects of salinity on Enterococcus densities have also been observed
in field studies (Carr et al, 2010; Dorsey et al., 2010; Viau et al., 2011).
Enterococcal concentrations in the coastal waters of Mississippi were significantly negatively correlated with salinity over a 13-month period (salinity
range from 0.0% to 26.4%; r ¼ 0.70) (Carr et al., 2010). Similarly, in a
study of a California salt marsh, enterococci were significantly negatively
correlated with salinity over one 24 h tidal cycle (r ¼ 0.66; mean salinity
30.5  2.9%), but this relationship was not significant during a second
observation (r ¼ 0.33; mean salinity 29.4  0.2%) (Dorsey et al., 2010).
A significant negative correlation between enterococci concentrations and
salinity (as well as temperature and dissolved oxygen; r ¼ 0.32) was also
observed in a study of 22 streams in Hawaii with salinity ranging from
0.6% to 37.3% (Viau et al., 2011).

4.3. Starvation
One of the greatest variations between the enteric environment versus environmental habitats is the availability of nutrients to enterococci. This is
either due to natural limitation or competition with indigenous microorganisms. An early study demonstrated that a strain of Streptococcus faecalis (now
E. faecalis) was capable of extended survival (up to 12 days) when inoculated
in sterile sewage (Sinclair & Alexander, 1984). The same strain showed rapid
decline when inoculated in sterile lake water, however, and was not detectable at day 3, and the authors attribute differences in survival to the presence
of organic nutrients in the sewage. Enterococci have also been shown to



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

177

persist for weeks in other environmental habitats that are likely to have
greater nutrient contents than oligotrophic fresh or marine waters, including
soil, sediment, and sand (Byappanahalli & Fujioka, 2004; Byappanahalli
et al., 2006; Davies et al., 1995; Hartz et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2006;
Mallmann & Litsky, 1951). However, growth in these matrices was only
observed with indigenous microorganisms which were inhibited or eliminated suggesting that competition for nutrients is an important limiting factor (Byappanahalli, Roll, et al., 2012; Desmarais et al., 2002; Hartz
et al., 2008).
Enterococci have also been demonstrated to enter the viable but nonculturable (VBNC) state in response to environmental stressors in lake
waters (Lleò et al., 1998). Over a 60-day period, a strain of E. faecalis inoculated into sterilized like water maintained a consistent concentration near
106 CFU ml1 at 4 and 7  C by three cell count methods (Lleò et al., 1998).
After 5 days, however, culturable concentrations on two nutrient-rich agar
media declined to 103 CFU ml1 and enterococci were undetectable by
culture after 15 and 20 days at 4 and 7  C incubation temperatures, respectively. The strain was able to regrow from 7  C incubation when nutrient
concentrations in the water were increased and incubation was performed at
room temperature (Lleò et al., 1998). Investigation of protein expression
patterns of E. faecalis in either a starvation or VBNC state has revealed that
the two conditions represent different adaptations to environmental stress,
however (Heim et al., 2002). Adaptation of enterococci to the starvation
versus the VBNC state has been shown to be dependent on the type of environmental stress (e.g., UV exposure and temperature) with UV exposure
generally resulting in a loss of culturability (Lleò et al., 2005). Furthermore,
the time to reach nonculturability has been shown to be species-specific
(Lleò et al., 2001), and the enterococci can be divided into three distinct
groups based on the time required to reach this state as well as their ability
to be resuscitated in environmental simulations (Lleò et al., 2005).

4.4. Predation
Mortality of enterococci in response to predation by protozoa and/or infection and lysis by bacteriophage is thought to be a major reason for their
decline in the environment (Boehm e al., 2005; Davies et al., 1995;
Menon et al., 2003; Purnell et al., 2011; Surbeck et al., 2010; Wanjugi &
Harwood, 2013). In Australian sediment microcosm studies, enterococci
were able to persist at greater densities in freshwater sediments when



178

Christopher Staley et al.

protozoan predators were inactivated with cyclohexamide, but no difference in survival density was observed in marine sediments with or without
cyclohexamide (Davies et al., 1995). In contrast, a Belgian study comparing
freshwater and marine mortality rates of E. faecium, predation by protozoa,
was found to be lower, accounting for a mean of 76% of overall mortality, in
the freshwater river compared to 93% overall mortality at a marine site
(Menon et al., 2003). A model of factors contributing to enterococci die
off in the surf zone in California, however, revealed that grazing was a tertiary factor with dilution and inactivation by various environmental stressors
(e.g., sunlight, salinity, and starvation) having a greater impact (Boehm et al.,
2005). In addition to protozoa, bacteriophage specific to enterococci have
been identified, however, enterococci mortality as a result of lysis remains to
be studied directly (Purnell et al., 2011). While these studies have demonstrated that predation is an important top-down control of enterococci concentrations in environmental habitats, the specific role of various types of
predation in these habitats is only beginning to be understood.

REFERENCES
Aakra, A., Vebo, H., Snipen, L., Hirt, H., Aastveit, A., Kapur, V., et al. (2005). Transcriptional response of Enterococcus faecalis V583 to erythromycin. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 49, 2246–2259.
Aarestrup, F. M., Butaye, P., & Witte, W. (2002). Nonhuman reservoirs of enterococci. In
M. S. Glimore, D. B. Clewell, P. Courvalin, G. M. Dunny, B. E. Murray, & L. B. Rice
(Eds.), The enterococci: Pathogenesis, molecular biology and antibiotic resistance (pp. 55–100).
Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press.
Ahmed, W., & Katouli, M. (2008). Phenotypic variations of enterococci in surface waters:
Analysis of biochemical fingerprinting data from multi-catchments. Journal of Applied
Microbiology, 105, 452–458.
Anderson, S. A., Turner, S. J., & Lewis, G. D. (1997). Enterococci in the New Zealand environment: Implications for water quality monitoring. Water Science and Technology, 35,
325–331.
Anderson, K. L., Whitlock, J. E., & Harwood, V. J. (2005). Persistence and differential survival of fecal indicator bacteria in subtropical waters and sediments. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 3041–3048.
Badgley, B. D., Nayak, B. S., & Harwood, V. J. (2010). The importance of sediment and
submerged aquatic vegetation as potential habitats for persistent strains of enterococci
in a subtropical watershed. Water Research, 44, 5857–5866.
Badgley, B. D., Thomas, F. I. M., & Harwood, V. J. (2010). The effects of submerged aquatic
vegetation on the persistence of environmental populations of Enterococcus spp. Environmental Microbiology, 12, 1271–1281.
Bennett, R. J., & Dunny, G. M. (2010). Analogous telesensing pathways regulate mating and
virulence in two opportunistic human pathogens. mBio, 1, e00181–10.
Boehm, A. B., Grant, S. B., Kim, J. H., Mowbray, S. L., McGee, C. D., Clark, C. D., et al.
(2002). Decadal and shorter period variability of surf zone water quality at Huntington
Beach, California. Environmental Science & Technology, 36, 3885–3892.



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

179

Boehm, A. B., Keymer, D. P., & Shellenbarger, G. G. (2005). An analytical model of enterococci inactivation, grazing, and transport in the surf zone of a marine beach. Water
Research, 39, 3565–3578.
Boonanantanasarn, K., Gill, A. L., Yap, Y., Jayaprakash, V., Sullivan, M. A., & Gill, S. R.
(2012). Enterococcus faecalis enhances cell proliferation through hydrogen peroxidemediated epidermal growth factor receptor activation. Infection and Immunity, 80,
3545–3558.
Bourgeois-Nicolaos, N., Moubareck, C., Mangeney, N., Butel, M. J., & Doucet-Populaire, F.
(2006). Comparative study of vanA gene transfer from Enterococcus faecium to Enterococcus
faecalis and to Enterococcus faecium in the intestine of mice. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 254,
27–33.
Bourgogne, A., Garsin, D. A., Qin, X., Singh, K. V., Sillanpaa, J., Yerrapragada, S., et al.
(2008). Large scale variation in Enterococcus faecalis illustrated by the genome analysis of
strain OG1RF. Genome Biology, 9, R110.
Brownell, M. J., Harwood, V. J., Kurz, R. C., McQuaig, S. M., Lukasik, J., & Scott, T. M.
(2007). Confirmation of putative stormwater impact on water quality at a Florida beach
by microbial source tracking methods and structure of indicator organism populations.
Water Research, 41, 3747–3757.
Buchino, J. J., Ciambarella, E., & Light, I. (1979). Systemic group D streptococcal infection
in newborn infants. American Journal of Diseases of Children, 133, 270–273.
Butaye, P., Van Damme, K., Devriese, L. A., Van Damme, L., Bael, M., Lauwers, S., et al.
(2000). In vitro susceptibility of Enterococcus faecium isolated from food to growthpromoting and therapeutic antibiotics. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 54,
181–187.
Byappanahalli, M., & Fujioka, R. (2004). Indigenous soil bacteria and low moisture may limit
but allow faecal bacteria to multiply and become a minor population in tropical soils.
Water Science and Technology, 50, 27–32.
Byappanahalli, M. N., Nevers, M. B., Korajkic, A., Staley, Z. R., & Harwood, V. J. (2012).
Enterococci in the environment. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 76, 685–706.
Byappanahalli, M. N., Roll, B. M., & Fujioka, R. S. (2012). Evidence for occurrence, persistence, and growth potential of Escherichia coli and enterococci in Hawaii’s soil environments. Microbes and Environments, 27, 164–170.
Byappanahalli, M. N., Shively, D. A., Nevers, M. B., Sadowsky, M. J., & Whitman, R. L.
(2003). Growth and survival of Escherichia coli and enterococci populations in the macroalga Cladophora (Chlorophyta). FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 46, 203–211.
Byappanahalli, M. N., Whitman, R. L., Shively, D. A., Ting, W. T., Tseng, C. C., &
Nevers, M. B. (2006). Seasonal persistence and population characteristics of Escherichia
coli and enterococci in deep backshore sand of two freshwater beaches. Journal of Water
Health, 4, 313–320.
Cabelli, V. J., Dufour, A. P., McCabe, L. J., & Levin, M. A. (1982). Swimming-associated
gastroenteritis and water quality. American Journal of Epidemiology, 115, 606–616.
Carr, M. R., Wang, S. Y., McLean, T. I., Flood, C. J., & Ellender, R. D. (2010). Salmonella
rarely detected in Mississippi coastal waters and sediment. Journal of Applied Microbiology,
109, 2191–2199.
Chow, J. W., Kuritza, A., Shlaes, D. M., Green, M., Sahm, D. F., & Zervos, M. J. (1993).
Clonal spread of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium between patients in three hospitals in two states. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 31, 1609–1611.
Collins, M. D., Farrow, J. A. E., & Jones, D. (1986). Enterococcus mundtii sp. nov. International
Journal of Systematic Bacteriology, 36, 8–12.
Collins, M. D., Jones, D., Farrow, J. A. E., Kilpper-Bläz, R., & Schleifer, K. H. (1984).
Enterococcus avium nom. rev., comb. nov.; Enterococcus casseliflavus nom. rev., comb.
nov.; Enterococcus durans nom. rev., comb. nov.; Enterococcus gallinarum comb. nov.;



180

Christopher Staley et al.

and Enterococcus malodoratus sp. nov. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology, 34,
220–223.
Davies, C. M., Long, J. A. H., Donald, M., & Ashbolt, N. J. (1995). Survival of fecal microorganisms in marine and fresh water sediments. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
61, 1888–1896.
de Graef, E. M., Devriese, L. A., Vancanneyt, M., Baele, M., Collins, M. D., Lefebvre, K.,
et al. (2003). Description of Enterococcus canis sp. nov. from dogs and reclassification of
Enterococcus porcinus Teixeira et al. 2001 as a junior synonym of Enterococcus villorum
Vancanneyt et al. 2001. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology,
53, 1069–1074.
De Leener, E., Martel, A., De Graef, E. M., Top, J., Butaye, P., Haesebrouck, F., et al.
(2005). Molecular analysis of human, porcine, and poultry Enterococcus faecium isolates
and their erm(B) genes. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 2766–2770.
de Vaux, A., Laguerre, G., Divies, C., & Prevost, H. (1998). Enterococcus asini sp. nov. isolated
from the caecum of donkeys (Equus asinus). International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology,
48, 383–387.
Desmarais, T. R., Solo-Gabriele, H. M., & Palmer, C. J. (2002). Influence of soil on fecal
indicator organisms in a tidally influenced subtropical environment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 68, 1165–1172.
Devriese, L. A., Ceyssens, K., Rodrigues, U. M., & Collins, M. D. (1990). Enterococcus columbae, a species from pigeon intestines. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 71, 247–252.
Devriese, L. A., Hommez, J., Pot, B., & Haesebrouck, F. (1994). Identification and composition of the streptococcal and enterococcal flora of tonsils, intestines and faeces of pigs.
The Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 77, 31–36.
Devriese, L. A., Hommez, J., Wijfels, R., & Haesebrouck, F. (1991). Composition of the
enterococcal and streptococcal intestinal flora of poultry. The Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 71, 46–50.
Devriese, L. A., Laurier, L., De Herdt, P., & Haesebrouck, F. (1992). Enterococcal and streptococcal species isolated from faeces of calves, young cattle and dairy cows. The Journal of
Applied Bacteriology, 72, 29–31.
Dorsey, J. H., Carter, P. M., Bergquist, S., & Sagarin, R. (2010). Reduction of fecal indicator
bacteria (FIB) in the Ballona Wetlands saltwater marsh (Los Angeles County, California,
USA) with implications for restoration actions. Water Research, 44, 4630–4642.
Eigler, J. O., Wellman, W. E., Rooke, E. D., Keith, H. M., & Svien, H. J. (1961). Bacterial
meningits: General review (294 cases). Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 36, 357–365.
Facklam, R. (2002). History, taxonomy, biochemical characteristics and antibiotic susceptibility testing of enterococci. In M. S. Gilmore, D. B. Clewell, P. Courvalin,
G. M. Dunny, B. E. Murray, & L. B. Rice (Eds.), The enterococci: Pathogenesis, molecular
biology and antibiotic resistance (pp. 1–54). Washington, DC: American Society for
Microbiology Press.
Ferguson, D. M., Moore, D. F., Getrich, M. A., & Zhowandai, M. H. (2005). Enumeration
and speciation of enterococci found in marine and intertidal sediments and coastal water
in southern California. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 99, 598–608.
Ferrari, P. H., Cai, S., & Bombana, A. C. (2005). Effect of endodontic procedures on enterococci, enteric bacteria and yeasts in primary endodontic infections. International Endodontic Journal, 38, 372–380.
Freitas, A. R., Coque, T. M., Novais, C., Hammerum, A. M., Lester, C. H., Zervos, M. J.,
et al. (2011). Human and swine hosts share vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium
CC17 and CC5 and Enterococcus faecalis CC2 clonal clusters harboring Tn1546 on indistinguishable plasmids. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 49, 925–931.
Fujioka, R., & Byappanahalli, M. (2001). Microbial ecology controls the establishment of
faecal bacteria in tropical soil environment. In T. Matsuo, K. Hanaki, S. Takizawa, &



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

181

A. H. Satoh (Eds.), Advances in water and wastewater treatment technology (pp. 273–283).
Tokyo: Elsevier.
Fujioka, R. S., Hashimoto, H. H., Siwak, E. B., & Young, R. H. F. (1981). Effect of sunlight
on survival of indicator bacteria in seawater. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 41,
690–696.
Fujioka, R., Sian-Denton, C., Borja, M., Castro, J., & Morphew, K. (1999). Soil: The environmental source of Escherichia coli and enterococci in Guam’s streams. Journal of Applied
Microbiology, 85, 83s–89s.
Garrison, R. N., Fry, D. E., Berberich, S., & Polk, H. C. (1982). Enterococcal bacteremia—
Clinical implications and determinants of death. Annals of Surgery, 196, 43–47.
Garsin, D. A., Sifri, C. D., Mylonakis, E., Qin, X., Singh, K. V., Murray, B. E., et al. (2001).
A simple model host for identifying gram-positive virulence factors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 10892–10897.
Gary, H. L., & Adams, J. C. (1985). Indicator bacteria in water and stream sediments near the
snowy range in southern Wyoming. Water Air and Soil Pollution, 25, 133–144.
Gentry-Weeks, C., Coburn, P. S., & Gilmore, M. S. (2002). Phages and other mobile virulence elements in gram-positive pathogens. Current Topics in Microbiology and Immunology, 264, 79–94.
Gilmore, M. S., Coburn, P. S., Nallapareddy, S. R., & Murray, B. E. (2002). Enterococcal
virulence. In M. S. Gilmore (Ed.), The enterococci: Pathogenesis, molecular biology and antibiotic
resistance (pp. 301–354). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press.
Gilmore, M. S., Lebreton, F., & van Schaik, W. (2013). Genomic transition of enterococci
from gut commensals to leading causes of multidrug-resistant hospital infection in the
antibiotic era. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 16, 10–16.
Grant, S. B., Sanders, B. F., Boehm, A. B., Redman, J. A., Kim, J. H., Mrse, R. D., et al.
(2001). Generation of enterococci bacteria in a coastal saltwater marsh and its impact on
surf zone water quality. Environmental Science & Technology, 35, 2407–2416.
Griffith, J. F., & Weisberg, S. B. (2011). Challenges in implementing new technology for
beach water quality monitoring: Lessons from a California demonstration project. Marine
Technology Society Journal, 45, 65–73.
Gross, P. A., Harkavy, L. M., Barden, G. E., & Flower, M. F. (1976). Epidemiology of nosocomial enterococcal urinary tract infection. American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 272,
75–81.
Haack, S. K., Fogarty, L. R., & Wright, C. (2003). Escherichia coli and enterococci at beaches
in the Grand Traverse Bay, Lake Michigan: Sources, characteristics, and environmental
pathways. Environmental Science & Technology, 37, 3275–3282.
Halliday, E., & Gast, R. J. (2011). Bacteria in beach sands: An emerging challenge in
protecting coastal water quality and bather health. Environmental Science & Technology,
45, 370–379.
Hammerum, A. M. (2012). Enterococci of animal origin and their significance for public
health. Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 18, 619–625.
Hardina, C. M., & Fujioka, R. S. (1991). Soil: The environmental source of Escherichia coli and
enterococci in Hawaii streams. Environmental Toxicology and Water Quality, 6, 185–195.
Hartz, A., Cuvelier, M., Nowosielski, K., Bonilla, T. D., Green, M., Esiobu, N., et al.
(2008). Survival potential of Escherichia coli and enterococci in subtropical beach sand:
Implications for water quality managers. Journal of Environmental Quality, 37, 898–905.
Heikens, E., van Schaik, W., Leavis, H. L., Bonten, M. J., & Willems, R. J. (2008). Identification of a novel genomic island specific to hospital-acquired clonal complex
17 Enterococcus faecium isolates. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 74, 7094–7097.
Heim, S., Lleo, M., Bonato, B., Guzman, C. A., & Canepari, P. (2002). The viable but nonculturable state and starvation are different stress responses of Enterococcus faecalis, as determined by proteome analysis. Journal of Bacteriology, 184, 6739–6745.



182

Christopher Staley et al.

Huycke, M. M. (2002). Physiology of enterococci. In M. S. Gilmore, D. B. Clewell,
P. Courvalin, G. M. Dunny, B. E. Murray, & L. B. Rice (Eds.), The enterococci: Pathogenesis, molecular biology and antibiotic resistance (pp. 133–176). Washington, DC: American
Society for Microbiology Press.
Huycke, M. M., Spiegel, C. A., & Gilmore, M. S. (1991). Bacteremia caused by hemolytic,
high-level gentamicin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
35, 1626–1634.
Imamura, G. J., Thompson, R. S., Boehm, A. B., & Jay, J. A. (2011). Wrack promotes the
persistence of fecal indicator bacteria in marine sands and seawater. FEMS Microbiology
Ecology, 77, 40–49.
Jenkins, T. A. M., Scott, T. M., Morgan, M. R., & Rose, J. B. (2005). Occurrence of alternative fecal indicators and enteric viruses in Michigan rivers. Journal of Great Lakes
Research, 31, 22–31.
Jensen, L. B. (1998). Differences in the occurrence of two base pair variants of Tn1546 from
vancomycin-resistant enterococci from humans, pigs, and poultry. Antimicrobial Agents
and Chemotherapy, 42, 2463–2464.
Jensen, L. B., Hammerum, A. M., Poulsen, R. L., & Westh, H. (1999). Vancomycinresistant Enterococcus faecium strains with highly similar pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
patterns containing similar Tn1546-like elements isolated from a hospitalized patient
and pigs in Denmark. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 43, 724–725.
Johnsen, P. J., Osterhus, J. I., Sletvold, H., Sorum, M., Kruse, H., Nielsen, K., et al. (2005).
Persistence of animal and human glycopeptide-resistant enterococci on two Norwegian
poultry farms formerly exposed to avoparcin is associated with a widespread plasmidmediated vanA element within a polyclonal Enterococcus faecium population. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 159–168.
Kay, D., Stapleton, C. M., Wyer, M. D., Mcdonald, A. T., Crowther, J., Paul, N., et al.
(2005). Decay of intestinal enterococci concentrations in high-energy estuarine and
coastal waters: Towards real-time T90 values for modeling faecal indicators in recreational waters. Water Research, 39, 655–667.
Knee, K. L., Layton, B. A., Street, J. H., Boehm, A. B., & Paytan, A. (2008). Sources of
nutrients and fecal indicator bacteria to nearshore waters on the north shore of Kauai
(Hawaii, USA). Estuaries and Coasts, 31, 607–622.
Korajkic, A., Badgley, B. D., Brownell, M. J., & Harwood, V. J. (2009). Application of
microbial source tracking methods in a Gulf of Mexico field setting. Journal of Applied
Microbiology, 107, 1518–1527.
Korajkic, A., Brownell, M. J., & Harwood, V. J. (2011). Investigation of human sewage pollution and pathogen analysis at Florida Gulf coast beaches. Journal of Applied Microbiology,
110, 174–183.
Korajkic, A., McMinn, B. R., Harwood, V. J., Shanks, O. C., Fout, G. S., & Ashbolt, N. J.
(2013). Differential decay of enterococci and Escherichia coli originating from two fecal
pollution sources. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 79, 2488–2492.
Kuhn, I., Iversen, A., Finn, M., Greko, C., Burman, L. G., Blanch, A. R., et al. (2005).
Occurrence and relatedness of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in animals, humans,
and the environment in different European regions. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 5383–5390.
Le Fevre, N. M., & Lewis, G. D. (2003). The role of resuspension in enterococci distribution
in water at an urban beach. Water Science and Technology, 47, 205–210.
Leavis, H., Top, J., Shankar, N., Borgen, K., Bonten, M., van Embden, J., et al. (2004).
A novel putative enterococcal pathogenicity island linked to the esp virulence gene
of Enterococcus faecium and associated with epidemicity. Journal of Bacteriology, 186,
672–682.



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

183

Lee, C. M., Lin, T. Y., Lin, C. C., Kohbodi, G. A., Bhattl, A., Lee, R., et al. (2006). Persistence of fecal indicator bacteria in Santa Monica Bay beach sediments. Water Research,
40, 2593–2602.
Lempiainen, H., Kinnunen, K., Mertanen, A., & Wright, A. (2005). Occurrence of virulence
factors among human intestinal enterococcal isolates. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 41,
341–344.
Lessard, E. J., & Sieburth, J. M. (1983). Survival of natural sewage populations of enteric bacteria in diffusion and batch chambers in the marine environment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 45, 950–959.
Lester, C. H., Frimodt-Møller, N., Sørensen, T. L., Monnet, D. L., & Hammerum, A. M.
(2006). In vivo transfer of the vanA resistance gene from an Enterococcus faecium isolate of
animal origin to an E. faecium isolate of human origin in the intestines of human volunteers. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 50, 596–599.
Lleò, M. M., Bonato, B., Benedetti, D., & Canepari, P. (2005). Survival of enterococcal species in aquatic environments. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 54, 189–196.
Lleò, M. M., Bonato, B., Tafi, M. C., Signoretto, C., Boaretti, M., & Canepari, P. (2001).
Resuscitation rate in different enterococcal species in the viable but non-culturable state.
Journal of Applied Microbiology, 91, 1095–1102.
Lleò, M. M., Tafi, M. C., & Canepari, P. (1998). Nonculturable Enterococcus faecalis cells are
metabolically active and capable of resuming active growth. Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 21, 333–339.
Mallmann, W. L., & Litsky, W. (1951). Survival of selected enteric organisms in various types
of soil. American Journal of Public Health, 41, 38–44.
Manson, J. M., Hancock, L. E., & Gilmore, M. S. (2010). Mechanism of chromosomal transfer of Enterococcus faecalis pathogenicity island, capsule, antimicrobial resistance, and other
traits. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107,
12269–12274.
Martin, J. D., & Mundt, J. O. (1972). Enterococci in insects. Applied Microbiology, 24, 575–580.
Martinez-Murcia, A. J., & Collins, M. D. (1991). Enterococcus sulfureus, a new yellowpigmented Enterococcus species. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 80, 69–73.
Mason, K. L., Stepien, T. A., Blum, J. E., Holt, J. F., Labbe, N. H., Rush, J. S., et al. (2011).
From commensal to pathogen: Translocation of Enterococcus faecalis from the midgut to
the hemocoel of Manduca sexta. mBio, 2, e00065-00011.
McBride, S. M., Coburn, P. S., Baghdayan, A. S., Willems, R. J., Grande, M. J., Shankar, N.,
et al. (2009). Genetic variation and evolution of the pathogenicity island of Enterococcus
faecalis. Journal of Bacteriology, 191, 3392–3402.
McBride, S. M., Fischetti, V. A., Leblanc, D. J., Moellering, R. C., Jr., & Gilmore, M. S.
(2007). Genetic diversity among Enterococcus faecalis. PLoS One, 2, e582.
Menon, P., Billen, G., & Servais, P. (2003). Mortality rates of autochthonous and fecal bacteria in natural aquatic ecosystems. Water Research, 37, 4151–4158.
Moellering, R. C. (1992). Emergence of Enterococcus as a significant pathogen. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 14, 1173–1176.
Moellering, R. C., Jr., Watson, B. K., & Kunz, L. J. (1974). Endocarditis due to group
D streptococci. Comparison of disease caused by Streptococcus bovis with that produced
by the enterococci. American Journal of Medicine, 57, 239–250.
Muller, T., Ulrich, A., Ott, E. M., & Muller, M. (2001). Identification of plant-associated
enterococci. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 91, 268–278.
Mundt, J. O. (1961). Occurrence of enterococci: Bud, blossom, and soil studies. Applied
Microbiology, 9, 541–544.
Mundt, J. O. (1963a). Occurrence of enterococci in animals in a wild environment. Applied
Microbiology, 11, 136–140.



184

Christopher Staley et al.

Mundt, J. O. (1963b). Occurrence of enterococci on plants in a wild environment. Applied
Microbiology, 11, 141–144.
Murray, B. E. (1990). The life and times of the Enterococcus. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 3,
46–65.
Murray, B. E., Singh, K. V., Markowitz, S. M., Lopardo, H. A., Patterson, J. E.,
Zervos, M. J., et al. (1991). Evidence for clonal spread of a single strain of b-lactamaseproducing Enterococcus (Streptococcus) faecalis to six hospitals in five states. Journal of Infectious
Disease, 163, 780–785.
Naser, S., Thompson, F. L., Hoste, B., Gevers, D., Vandemeulebroecke, K., Cleenwerck, I.,
et al. (2005). Phylogeny and identification of enterococci by atpA gene sequence analysis.
Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 43, 2224–2230.
Noble, C. J. (1978). Carriage of group D streptococci in the human bowel. Journal of Clinical
Pathology, 31, 1182–1186.
Noble, R. T., Lee, I. M., & Schiff, K. C. (2004). Inactivation of indicator micro-organisms
from various sources of faecal contamination in seawater and freshwater. Journal of Applied
Microbiology, 96, 464–472.
Obiri-Danso, K., & Jones, K. (2000). Intertidal sediments as reservoirs for hippurate negative
campylobacters, salmonellae and faecal indicators in three EU recognised bathing waters
in North West England. Water Research, 34, 519–527.
Ott, E. M., Muller, T., Muller, M., Franz, C. M. A. P., Ulrich, A., Gabel, M., et al. (2001).
Population dynamics and antagonistic potential of enterococci colonizing the
phyllosphere of grasses. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 91, 54–66.
Palmer, K. L., Carniol, K., Manson, J. M., Heiman, D., Shea, T., Young, S., et al. (2010).
High-quality draft genome sequences of 28 Enterococcus sp. isolates. Journal of Bacteriology, 192, 2469–2470.
Palmer, K. L., & Gilmore, M. S. (2010). Multidrug-resistant enterococci lack CRISPR-cas.
mBio, 1, e00227–10.
Palmer, K. L., Godfrey, P., Griggs, A., Kos, V. N., Zucker, J., Desjardins, C., et al. (2012).
Comparative genomics of enterococci: Variation in Enterococcus faecalis, clade structure in
E. faecium, and defining characteristics of E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus. mBio, 3,
e00318-00311.
Palmer, K. L., Kos, V. N., & Gilmore, M. S. (2010). Horizontal gene transfer and the
genomics of enterococcal antibiotic resistance. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 13,
632–639.
Paulsen, I. T., Banerjei, L., Myers, G. S., Nelson, K. E., Seshadri, R., Read, T. D., et al.
(2003). Role of mobile DNA in the evolution of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
faecalis. Science, 299, 2071–2074.
Phillips, M. C., Solo-Gabriele, H. M., Piggot, A. M., Klaus, J. S., & Zhang, Y. F. (2011).
Relationships between sand and water quality at recreational beaches. Water Research,
45, 6763–6769.
Purnell, S. E., Ebdon, J. E., & Taylor, H. D. (2011). Bacteriophage lysis of Enterococcus host
strains: A tool for microbial source tracking? Environmental Science & Technology, 45,
10699–10705.
Ran, Q. H., Badgley, B. D., Dillon, N., Dunny, G. M., & Sadowsky, M. J. (2013). Occurrence, genetic diversity, and persistence of enterococci in a Lake Superior watershed.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 79, 3067–3075.
Sanchez, P. S., Agudo, E. G., Castro, F. G., Alves, M. N., & Martins, M. T. (1986). Evaluation of the sanitary quality of marine recreational waters and sands from beaches of the
Sao Paulo State, Brazil. Water Science and Technology, 18, 61–72.
Santo Domingo, J. W., Siefring, S. C., & Haugland, R. A. (2003). Real-time PCR method
to detect Enterococcus faecalis in water. Biotechnology Letters, 25, 261–265.



Environmental and Animal-Associated Enterococci

185

Sayler, G. S., Nelson, J. D., Jr., Justice, A., & Colwell, R. R. (1975). Distribution and significance of fecal indicator organisms in the Upper Chesapeake Bay. Applied Microbiology,
30, 625–638.
Schleifer, K. H., & Kilpper-Bälz, R. (1984). Transfer of Streptococcus faecalis and Streptococcus
faecium to the genus Enterococcus nom. rev. as Enterococcus faecalis comb. nov. and Enterococcus faecium comb. nov. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology, 34, 31–34.
Sedgley, C. M., Lennan, S. L., & Clewell, D. B. (2004). Prevalence, phenotype and genotype
of oral enterococci. Oral Microbiology and Immunology, 19, 95–101.
Shankar, N., Baghdayan, A. S., & Gilmore, M. S. (2002). Modulation of virulence within a
pathogenicity island in vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis. Nature, 417, 746–750.
Sherman, J. M. (1937). The streptococci. Bacteriology Reviews, 1, 3–97.
Shibata, T., Solo-Gabriele, H. M., Fleming, L. E., & Elmir, S. (2004). Monitoring marine
recreational water quality using multiple microbial indicators in an urban tropical environment. Water Research, 38, 3119–3131.
Sinclair, J. L., & Alexander, M. (1984). Role of resistance to starvation in bacterial survival in
sewage and lake water. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 48, 410–415.
Sinton, L. W., Daviescolley, R. J., & Bell, R. G. (1994). Inactivation of enterococci and fecal
coliforms from sewage and meatworks effluents in seawater chambers. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 60, 2040–2048.
Sinton, L. W., Hall, C. H., Lynch, P. A., & Davies-Colley, R. J. (2002). Sunlight inactivation
of fecal indicator bacteria and bacteriophages from waste stabilization pond effluent in
fresh and saline waters. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 68, 1122–1131.
Staley, C., Reckhow, K. H., Lukasik, J., & Harwood, V. J. (2012). Assessment of sources of
human pathogens and fecal contamination in a Florida freshwater lake. Water Research,
46, 5799–5812.
Surbeck, C. Q., Jiang, S. C., & Grant, S. B. (2010). Ecological control of fecal indicator bacteria in an urban stream. Environmental Science & Technology, 44, 631–637.
Tannock, G. W., & Cook, G. (2002). Enterococci as members of the intestinal microflora of
humans. In M. S. Gilmore, D. B. Clewell, P. Courvalin, G. M. Dunny, B. E. Murray, &
L. B. Rice (Eds.), The enterococci: Pathogenesis, molecular biology and antibiotic resistance
(pp. 101–132). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press.
Tendolkar, P. M., Baghdayan, A. S., & Shankar, N. (2003). Pathogenic enterococci: New
developments in the 21st century. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 60, 2622–2636.
Tremblay, C. L., Letellier, A., Quessy, S., Daignault, D., & Archambault, M. (2012).
Antibiotic-resistant Enterococcus faecalis in abattoir pigs and plasmid colocalization and
cotransfer of tet(M) and erm(B) genes. Journal of Food Protection, 75, 1595–1602.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (1986). Ambient water quality criteria for bacteria 1986. EPA 440/5-84-002. Washington, DC: Office of Water Regulations and
Standards, US Environmental Protection Agency.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2012). Recreational water quality criteria. 820F-12-058. Washington, DC: Office of Water Regulations and Standards, US
Environmental Protection Agency.
Viau, E. J., Goodwin, K. D., Yamahara, K. M., Layton, B. A., Sassoubre, L. M., Burns, S. L.,
et al. (2011). Bacterial pathogens in Hawaiian coastal streams—Associations with fecal
indicators, land cover, and water quality. Water Research, 45, 3279–3290.
Wade, T. J., Calderon, R. L., Brenner, K. P., Sams, E., Beach, M., Haugland, R., et al.
(2008). High sensitivity of children to swimming-associated gastrointestinal illness:
Results using a rapid assay of recreational water quality. Epidemiology, 19, 375–383.
Wade, T. J., Calderon, R. L., Sams, E., Beach, M., Brenner, K. P., Williams, A. H., et al.
(2006). Rapidly measured indicators of recreational water quality are predictive of
swimming-associated gastrointestinal illness. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114, 24–28.



186

Christopher Staley et al.

Wade, T. J., Pai, N., Eisenberg, J. N. S., & Colford, J. M. (2003). Do U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency water quality guidelines for recreational waters prevent gastrointestinal illness? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Environmental Health Perspectives, 111,
1102–1109.
Wanjugi, P., & Harwood, V. J. (2013). The influence of predation and competition on the
survival of commensal and pathogenic fecal bacteria in aquatic habitats. Environmental
Microbiology, 15, 517–526.
Whitman, M. S., Pitsakis, P. G., DeJesus, E., Osborne, A. J., Levison, M. E., &
Johnson, C. C. (1996). Gastrointestinal tract colonization with vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus faecium in an animal model. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 40,
1526–1530.
Whitman, R. L., Shively, D. A., Pawlik, H., Nevers, M. B., & Byappanahalli, M. N. (2003).
Occurrence of Escherichia coli and enterococci in Cladophora (Chlorophyta) in nearshore
water and beach sand of Lake Michigan. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 69,
4714–4719.
Willems, R. J., Top, J., van Santen, M., Robinson, D. A., Coque, T. M., Baquero, F., et al.
(2005). Clonal spread of nacomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium from distinct nosocomial genetic complex. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 11, 821–828.
Willems, R. J., Top, J., van Schaik, W., Leavis, H., Bonten, M., Siren, J., et al. (2012).
Restricted gene flow among hospital subpopulations of Enterococcus faecium. mBio, 3,
e00151-00112.
Yamahara, K. M., Layton, B. A., Santoro, A. E., & Boehm, A. B. (2007). Beach sands along
the California coast are diffuse sources of fecal bacteria to coastal waters. Environmental
Science & Technology, 41, 4515–4521.

