Q IWA Publishing 2005 Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

381

A review of technologies for rapid detection of bacteria
in recreational waters
Rachel T. Noble and Stephen B. Weisberg

ABSTRACT
Monitoring of recreational beaches for fecal indicator bacteria is currently performed using culturebased technology that can require more than a day for laboratory analysis, during which time
swimmers are at risk. Here we review new methods that have the potential to reduce the
measurement period to less than an hour. These methods generally involve two steps. The first is

Rachel T. Noble (corresponding author)
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Institute of Marine Sciences,
3431 Arendell St, Morehead City,
NC 28557,
USA
E-mail: rtnoble@email.unc.edu

target capture, in which the microbial group of interest (or some molecular/chemical/or
biochemical signature of the group) is removed, tagged or amplified to differentiate it from the
remaining material in the sample. We discuss three classes of capture methods: 1) Surface and
whole-cell recognition methods, including immunoassay techniques and molecule-specific probes;
2) Nucleic acid methods, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR), quantitative PCR (Q-PCR),

Stephen B. Weisberg
Southern California Coastal Water
Research Project,
7171 Fenwick Lane, Westminster,
CA 92683,
USA
E-mail: stevew@sccwrp.org

nucleic acid sequence based amplification (NASBA) and microarrays; and 3) Enzyme/substrate
methods utilizing chromogenic or fluorogenic substrates. The second step is detection, in which
optical, electrochemical or piezoelectric technologies are used to quantify the captured, tagged or
amplified material. The biggest technological hurdle for all of these methods is sensitivity, as EPA’s
recommended bathing water standard is less than one cell per ml and most detection technologies
measure sample volumes less than 1 ml. This challenge is being overcome through addition of
preconcentration or enrichment steps, which have the potential to boost sensitivity without the
need to develop new detector technology. The second hurdle is demonstrating a relationship to
health risk, since most new methods are based on measuring cell structure without assessing
viability and may not relate to current water quality standards that were developed in
epidemiology studies using culture-based methods. Enzyme/substrate methods may be the first
rapid methods adopted because they are based on the same capture technology as currentlyapproved EPA methods and their relationship to health risk can be established by demonstrating
equivalency to existing procedures. Demonstration of equivalency may also be possible for some
surface and whole-cell recognition methods that capture bacteria in a potentially viable state.
Nucleic acid technologies are the most versatile, but measure nonviable structure and will require
inclusion in epidemiological studies to link their measurement with health risk.
Key words | E. coli, enterococci, water quality, recreational, optical, electrochemical

INTRODUCTION
Considerable resources are expended each year to measure

current methods of enumerating bacteria are too slow to

indicator bacteria and assess whether recreational beaches

provide full protection from exposure to waterborne

are free from fecal contamination (Schiff et al. 2002).These

pathogens. The current United States Environmental

monitoring programs are compromised, though, because

Protection Agency (USEPA) approved methods to evaluate

doi: 10.2166/wh.2005.051

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



382

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

recreational waters require an 18 to 96 hour incubation

tration approach included in sample processing. In addition,

period, while several studies have shown that temporal

presence/absence information is not adequate for assessing

changes in indicator bacteria levels in beach water occur on

recreational waters. Methods must yield accurate quantitative

much shorter time scales (Leecaster and Weisberg 2001;

information. Other problems with water samples include the

Boehm et al. 2002). Thus, contaminated beaches remain

presence of potential interferents to specific methodological

open during the laboratory incubation period and are often

approaches, such as salinity, humic acids, highly variable and

clean by the time warnings are posted.

complex sample matrices, and the presence of other con-

This processing time lag can also negatively affect

founding dominant native bacterial species. In this paper, we

tracking of contamination sources. A frequently used

review rapid methodologies that are being developed for use in

tracking approach is to look for differential bacterial

recreational waters and also identify the major impediments to

concentrations at the confluence of upstream tributaries.

adoption of these methods. For the purpose of this article, we

However, the fecal contamination signal can dissipate or

treat “rapid” as methods that provide results in less than 4

disperse while the initial samples that would trigger such an

hours (including sample preparation time), which is the

investigation are being processed, making it difficult to

longest time frame that reasonably allows managers to take

subsequently track the sources of fecal contamination. Even

action to protect public health (i.e. post or close a beach) on the

when upstream tracking is successfully initiated, the slow

same day that water samples are collected.

laboratory processing time requires that many locations be
examined simultaneously, rather than using spatially-

METHODOLOGICAL OVERVIEW

sequential sampling that would be possible if a more rapid
(and possibly field-based) method were available.

There are two general steps involved in the application of

The limiting factor for present methods is that they rely

rapid technologies. The first is the capture, in which

on culturing techniques that either measure a metabolic

the microbial species or group of interest (or some

endpoint or determine growth of a microorganism after an

molecular/chemical/or biochemical signature of the group)

extended incubation period. New molecular methods that

is removed, tagged or amplified to differentiate it from the

allow direct measurement of cellular properties without

remaining material in the sample. This step is typically

incubation are becoming available and have the potential to

responsible for the selectivity of the approach. The second

reduce the measurement period to less than an hour. These

step is the detection, in which the captured, tagged or amplified

new technologies also allow expansion of the number and

material is counted or measured quantitatively. The detector

types of microbiological indicators that can be measured.

typically acts as a transducer, translating the biological,

Beach monitoring programs are presently based primarily

physical, or chemical alteration into a measurable signal.

on E. coli and Enterococcus spp. because they are easily and

These

steps

differ

slightly

among

measurement

inexpensively cultured. Molecular methods do not require

approaches, but they provide a useful outline for organizing

culturing and allow for pathogens such as viruses to be

our discussion. In many cases, a third step, preconcentration,

measured as easily as bacterial indicators, potentially

may be added prior to target capture because most rec-

providing a more direct link to public health risk.

reational waters have relatively dilute levels of contaminants

While development of molecular methods has advanced

compared to other applications. Recreational water stan-

considerably for use in several disciplines, such as the food

dards for bacterial indicators are roughly 100 cfu/100 ml, or

service and hospital industries (Fung 2002), there has been less

1 cell/ml. Since many detection technologies are based on

effort toward application of new methods for recreational

measuring less than a single ml, preconcentration may be

water quality testing. Water testing can present challenges that

necessary to achieve acceptable precision.

are not frequently encountered in these other fields. Generally
speaking, there are small numbers of the microorganisms of

Capture methods

interest in a water sample, therefore large volumes of water

There are three broad classes of capture methods used in

must typically be processed, or some enrichment or concen-

rapid microbial detection technology. Firstly, molecular

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



383

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

whole-cell and surface recognition methods capture and/or

2002; Dubitsky et al. 2002; Kooser et al. 2003). After antigen

label the target microorganism by binding to molecular

capture by the primary Ab, remaining excess material is

structures on the exterior surface or to structures within the

typically washed away, and fluorescently labeled secondary

interior of a bacterium, virus, or to genetic material of

Abs are used for detection. Immunomagnetic capture, in

interest. These include immunoassay techniques, bacterio-

which organisms are captured using an Ab-antigen-magnet

phage, and molecule-specific probes, such as lipid or

complex, can also be employed (e.g. Shelton et al. 2003).

protein attachment-based approaches. Secondly, nucleic

With use of an external magnet, the bound material can be

acid detection methods target specific nucleic acid

effectively separated from the remainder of the sample. One

sequences of bacteria, viruses, or protozoa. These include

advantage of Ab-based approaches is that captured bacteria

polymerase chain reaction (PCR), reverse transcriptase

are still viable and can be further studied, having the

polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), quantitative PCR

potential to yield more specific information about the

(Q-PCR), nucleic acid sequence based amplification

sources of the bacteria through assessment of genotypic or

(NASBA), and microarrays. Thirdly, enzyme/substrate

phenotypic information (Scott et al. 2002).

methods are based upon either existing chromogenic or

The third type of capture technology is nucleic acid

fluorogenic substrate methods already in wide use, or new

priming, which relies upon the affinity of specific nucleic

enzyme-substrate approaches.

acid sequences, or primers, to “fish” for a complementary

Enzyme/substrate methods are enhancements of cur-

sequence of interest. The biochemical basis for nucleic

rently approved methods such as the defined substrate

acid priming is the foundation for techniques such as

w

technology employed in the commercial kits, Colilert and

polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based methods, micro-

Enterolertw (IDEXX Laboratories, Inc). Several new tech-

arrays and nucleic acid sequence based amplification

nologies that are being developed use that technology in

(NASBA). Primers can be designed that are complemen-

conjunction with high-sensitivity fluorescence detection

tary to a single gene sequence, allowing these methods to

instruments to reduce the time required for the assay. Capture

be highly specific.

is achieved through fluorophore-tagged growth substrates

PCR utilizes a combination of reagents and temperature

included in a proprietary powder media that are added to

change schemes to anneal and denature nucleic acid

water samples. Upon growth, specific bacterial enzymatic

sequences for exponential amplification of the gene of

activity cleaves the fluorophore from the substrates, causing

interest (Saiki et al. 1985). Quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) is a

fluorescence to increase (Edberg et al. 1989). This fluor-

primer-based molecular technique that combines the

escence can then be detected by a number of instruments.

specificity of conventional PCR with the quantitative

Molecular recognition approaches have the potential

measurement of fluorescence for determining the presence

for being more rapid, more sensitive and adaptable to a

of specific types of nucleic acid in environmental samples.

wider class of indicators and pathogens. Antibody (Ab)-

One type is the molecular beacon approach, which employs

based approaches, which take advantage of the specific

the use of dual-labeled oligonucleotide probes, that typically

binding affinities of Abs to specific antigens, can either be

bear a 50 -fluorescent reporter dye and a “dark” quencher

produced in the laboratory or purchased commercially. The

group in the 30 -position (most commonly Dabcyl). The

Abs can be specific for a single strain (or serotype) of

probe has a unique structure designed to specifically

bacteria (e.g. E. coli O157:H7), or can potentially be

hybridize to a target sequence. When the probe hybridizes

produced for a single species (E. coli) or groups or families

to its target sequence, the structure is disrupted and the 50 -

of organisms (enterococci), although the latter two

reporter is physically separated from the 30 -quencher,

approaches are generally more difficult. Once produced

allowing fluorescence emission to be detected and

and tested for specificity, Abs are typically mounted onto a

measured quantitatively (Heid et al. 1996). Lyon (2001) has

support system. Well-documented support systems include

used this approach for detection of Vibrio cholerae in both

polystyrene waveguides, nylon supports, glass slides, and

oysters

cantilevers (Kasempimolporn et al. 2000; DeMarco & Lim

approaches are also possible, including the use of

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest

and

seeded

water

samples.

Other

Q-PCR



384

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Taqmanw and Scorpionw primer-probe chemistries which
can be used with various flourescent dyes for sensitive, highfidelity Q-PCR.
Microarrays (or ‘microchips’) involve the attachment of a
sequence specific probe on a slide, or array, where specific
hybridization of the sequence of interest occurs after a series
of linking and wash steps, and subsequent color change
indicates positive detection. Microarrays involve the use of
cDNA probes, often greater than 200 nucleotides in length, or
smaller oligonucleotides (20 –100 nucleotides in length) that
are fashioned to glass supports, nylon strips, or silica wafers
(Richmond et al. 1999; Bavykin et al. 2001; Wu et al. 2003).
With a single microarray, thousands of microorganisms can
be analyzed at a single time. Upon hybridization of a target to
the probe of interest, fluorescence is generated as data on the
surface of each slide or “chip”. This fluorescence can be read
in a number of ways. A planar waveguide can be used for
successful imaging of surface confined fluorescence, in
conjunction with the use of a cooled charge coupled device
(CCD) camera (Rowe-Taitt et al. 2000). Laser scanning can
also be used to “read” the fluorescent signals, the approach
that the well-known microarray manufacturing company
Affymetrix recommends (www.Affymetrix.com). Microarrays can also be analyzed with wide-field-high aperture
fluorescence microscopes equipped with cooled CCD
cameras.
NASBA is similar to PCR technology, but is an
isothermal based method of RNA amplification that was
applied originally to HIV-1 detection (Kievits et al. 1991).
Instead of utilizing a thermostable DNA polymerase, as
PCR does, RNA is amplified using an enzyme mixture at
a fixed temperature. NASBA detection systems are
currently commercially available from BioMerieux, Inc
(http://www.biomerieux.com) and have shown tremendous potential for use in environmental samples (Collins
et al. 2003; Paul et al. 2003). One advantage of NASBA
over PCR-based rapid detection methods is it does not
require a thermal cycler, improving portability. However,
some Q-PCR manufacturers have already addressed
portability of thermal cyclers. For example, Cepheid,
Inc.

manufactures

a

portable,

car

Detection technology
There are many instruments which can be used to detect a
range of chemical, optical, and biological signals generated by
the aforementioned capture methods. Most detection technologies revolve around measurement of optical, electrochemical, or piezoelectric properties. The technical aspects
of these approaches have been reviewed by Deisingh (2003).
Optical methods are the most frequently used detection
approach. The simplest detection units are spectrometers
and fluorometers, which can be used for spectroscopic or
fluorescence detection of indicator bacteria, respectively,
and are field portable. Another widely used option is flow
cytometry (FCM), in which cells are physically analyzed
based upon characteristics such as natural fluorescence or
light scattering (Collier and Campbell 1999; Veal et al.
2000). FCM is often paired with immunomagnetic capture
to concentrate cells which are passed single file in a fluid
stream with the light scatter from a laser defining cell count.
Advanced flow cytometers can even sort target cells away
from waste materials onto membranes or slides, for further
verification methods. FCM systems have been deployed in
the field, but they are generally not portable or robust and
require advanced training to operate.
Other options for optical detection systems include fiber
optics and laser-based interferometry. Both of these are
evanescent wave-based technologies, allowing measurement of binding (e.g. of fluorescently labeled antibodies to
antigens) at the fiber surface. This greatly reduces the
number of separation steps required to separate target from
non-target organisms in environmental samples.
Fiber optics is the most advanced of these technologies.
Fiber optic devices appear to be promising for environmental applications for two reasons: the ability to make remote
in situ measurements and the inherent sensitivity of optical
approaches. Most currently used fiber optics biosensors
involve the use of a combination of immuno-based capture
approaches, depending upon a series of non-labeled and
fluorescently labeled Abs designed specifically for the
organism(s) of interest.
Laser-based interferometry is based upon the fact that

powered

planar waveguides have evanescent fields that are responsive

Q-PCR instrument system, already in use for real-time

to changes in index of refraction. By optically combining

sampling for a variety of applications.

guided

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest

battery

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

and

reference

beams

in

an

interferometric



385

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

configuration, this response can be measured with high

for E. coli detection in natural samples. Even though they

sensitivity. Schneider et al. (1997) discuss the Hartman

succeeded in reducing detection time, their currently

Interferometer, which allows a microsensor fitted with the

reported detection limit was still . 104 cfu/100 ml, too

proper chemical/biological coatings to detect multiple

high for use in recreational waters.

contaminants in soil, groundwater, and air. Interferometric

Piezoelectric-based biosensors are based on quartz

technology can easily be combined with Ab-antigen

crystals that oscillate at a defined frequency when an

binding mechanisms. Detection is based upon small shifts

oscillating voltage is applied, allowing high sensitivity.

in optical properties of the organism (upon Ab binding),

Binding of an analyte to the quartz crystal surface changes

making this approach highly sensitive. Hartman et al. (1995)

the mass of the crystal and causes a measurable change in

originally applied this technology to detect proteins specific

the

oscillation

frequency.

Piezoelectric

detection

to Salmonella spp in food, and have more recently applied

approaches are currently most commonly paired with Ab-

their technology to detect 12 different pathogens. Interfero-

antigen capture modes. Microorganisms captured by

metric approaches have been demonstrated to be highly

specific antibodies are immobilized onto the surface of the

sensitive, able to detect down to 1 cell. However, the

quartz crystal, which is then subjected to an electrical field.

availability and specificity of the Abs used must be pre-

Once the electrical field is applied, the quartz begins to

determined and empirically demonstrated. This approach

oscillate with increasing amplitude. At a specific oscillation,

has not been fully developed for recreational water testing,

the antigen (virus or bacteria) suddenly is removed from the

but with an appropriate preconcentration method, this

surface of the crystal. The noise created during this

technology holds promise for development.

disruption is proportional to the number of antigens that

Electrochemical signal detectors measure an electro-

were originally attached to the surface of the crystal.

chemical response, of which there are three basic types: 1)

Piezoelectric biosensors have been used to detect Salmo-

conductometric, which is a change in conductance of a

nella typhimurium in food (Babacan et al. 2002), and for the

bacterial cell between a pair of electrodes due to cell

detection of Listeria monocytogenes (Vaughan et al. 2001).

metabolism; 2) potentiometric, which is the difference in

Sensitivity levels have not been demonstrated at 1 cell/ml to

electrical potential between a sample and a reference

date for piezoelectric-based detection, but flow-through

electrode; and 3) amperometric, which is a response due to

systems as presented by Babacan et al. (2002) have the

oxidation or reduction of a specific chemical at a constant

potential to be combined with preconcentration systems.

applied potential. Electrochemical detection approaches are
typically fast and the equipment necessary to measure the
signal can be low-cost. Electrochemical approaches are not

SAMPLE PREPROCESSING

as susceptible to turbidity interference as optical-based

The biggest technical impediments to the implementation of

detection and typically have very low detection limits.

these methods are the detection sensitivity and the volume

However, seawater is highly buffered, which can interfere

assayed. Most detection technologies are based on measur-

with some electrochemical-based measurements.

ing sample volumes less than 1 ml. EPA’s recommended

Several groups have been working to develop novel

marine bathing water standard is 35 enterococci per 100 ml,

electrochemical applications to measure bacteria. Perez

which equates to less than one cell per ml. Thus, detectors

et al. (2001) has developed an E. coli method based on

measuring only a 1 ml volume, even if they are capable of

hydrolysis of 4-APGal to 4-aminophenyl (4AP), which is a

detection of one cell per ml, will necessarily produce

highly electro-active process that can be detected by small

unacceptable sensitivity and poor precision at concen-

shifts in amperes. This approach is paired with the

trations near the standard.

measurement of cellobiose oxidation, which is indicative

There are two possible approaches to overcoming

of viability, but has been limited by the time necessary for

inadequate sensitivity. The first is to improve detector

bacterial growth to produce the 4AP molecule. Nistor et al.

technology to allow measurement of larger volume samples,

(2002) have used amplification to reduce the time required

but this is a longer term option. Most researchers already

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



386

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

use the most advanced detectors available and more

widespread use in the next few years. Other researchers are

sensitive detector technology is not likely to be available

working to adapt similar techniques toward measurement

in the near future because of the cost and time necessary for

of specific pathogens, but we have chosen to focus on

development. The preferred option at the present time is

methods being developed for E. coli or enterococci because

preconcentration, which can enhance sensitivity several

the management of recreational waters is presently based

fold by increasing the number of target organisms per unit

upon comparison to these bacterial standards.

volume at a relatively modest cost.
Several available modes of preconcentration are being
used, including filtration, size-fractionation, centrifugation

Dual wavelength fluorometry

and immunomagnetic separation or combinations of these

Rapid methods based on the enzyme-substrate capture

methods. Preconcentration needs vary according to the

approach are likely to be available commercially in the

amount of indicator bacteria present in the sample,

shortest time-frame, because they are enhancements of pre-

the detection limit of the technology being used and the

existing technology. Whereas commercial applications of

presence of abiotic and biotic confounding factors that are

this technology, such as those produced by IDEXX

commonly found in recreational water samples. The biggest

Laboratories, Inc., rely on technicians looking for a visible

drawback to preconcentration is the additional time it

color change after an 18-hour incubation, advanced

requires, potentially pushing some methods past the 4-hour

fluorometry techniques enhance the time to results by

criterion. Depending on the method employed, preconcen-

quantifying bacterial concentration based on the rate of

tration could also result in partial loss of target organisms or

color change early in the incubation process. Researchers at

the unintended concentration of environmental contami-

the University of Connecticut have further refined the

nants, both of which could have unpredictable effects on

method of Jadamec et al. (1999), through the use of dual

results. Still, these potential shortcomings can be overcome

wavelength fluorometry to simultaneously assess both

and preconcentration developments will play an important

enzymatic hydrolysis and the loss of substrate. A Farrand

role in advancing the field.

dual wavelength fluorometer is used at excitation and

Preprocessing may also be necessary to remove poten-

emission wavelengths of 340 and 450 nm, respectively,

tial biotic and abiotic interferences in the sample, particu-

with the ratio between the two readings used to infer

larly if the samples are preconcentrated. Organic matter

bacterial concentrations without lengthy incubations. Dual

(e.g., humic acids), cellular debris and heavy metals can

wavelength fluorometry is less susceptible to interference

inhibit the reactions necessary for measurement of nucleic

from environmental contaminants because detection of

acids (Reynolds et al. 1997). Preprocessing to separate

both substrate and product would be affected equally

microorganisms or molecular targets in microorganisms

leaving the ratio unchanged regardless of turbidity or the

from matrix constituents may involve chemical precipi-

presence of colored substances. To date, the researchers

tation, solvent extraction, adsorption to charged surfaces,

have been able to detect Enterococcus spp., Escherichia coli

chelation, or binding through immunomagnetic separation.

and total coliforms at EPA’s recommended bathing water
standards in less than 6 hours. Given the relationship of the
change in fluorescence signal intensity of the product and

SPECIFIC TECHNOLOGIES IN DEVELOPMENT

substrate ratio with increasing cell numbers, along with an
algorithm for determining the starting concentrations of the

A number of researchers are presently working to develop

cells of interest, a measurement of original bacterial

technologies for recreational water quality assessments

indicator concentration can be made (Figures 1 and 2).

based on combinations of the above-mentioned capture

Further optimization of the growth conditions for several of

and detection concepts. Below, we highlight a few of the

the bacterial indicators, and optimization of dual wave-

technologies that show promise for accurately measuring

length instrumental detection parameters has recently

indicator bacteria and which are likely to be available for

reduced the time to detection by 25%, resulting in a current

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



387

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

Figure 1 | The relationship of Enterococcus growth rate with the ratio of change in fluorescence signal intensity of the product and available substrate using dual-wavelength
fluorometry.

Figure 2 | A preliminary algorithm demonstrating the time to detection for a given starting concentration of Enterococcus faecalis in an environmental sample using dual wavelength
fluorometry.

detection time of about 4 hours for a starting population of

antibody within an evanescent wave and is detected with

1 CFU/ml.

a narrow-band laser light from the biosensor. The data are
expressed as increases in fluorescence proportional in
magnitude to target pathogen concentrations. Lim and

Immunoassay approaches

colleagues have developed an innovative system to detect

There are several promising immunoassay approaches in

pathogens such as E. coli O157:H7 directly from ground

development that have been adapted from technologies

beef, apple juice, and raw sewage (DeMarco et al. 1999;

applied for rapid detection of food borne pathogens (Lim

Demarco and Lim, 2001, DeMarco and Lim 2002; Kramer

2000; Lim 2001). An example is the evanescent wave fiber

et al. 2002). Biotin-streptavidin interactions were used to

optic biosensor (Tims et al. 2001; DeMarco and Lim 2001;

attach polyclonal anti-E. coli O157:H7 antibodies to the

Lim 2003; Kramer and Lim 2004). This approach is based on

surface of the fiber optic probe. These researchers are

a biosensor sandwich immunoassay that utilizes antibodies

experimenting with hollow fiber filters and incubation in

on a fiber optic waveguide to detect the target pathogen

selective enrichment broth for 3 to 6 hours prior to

(Figure 3). The captured target is illuminated by a

biosensor assay to detect low bacterial concentrations for

fluorophore-labeled

application to recreational waters. If the preconcentration

(Cy5

or

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest

Alexa

Fluor

647)



388

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

Capture antibody

Y Y Y Y YY Y YY
Y Y Y Y Y Y YY

Antigen

Y Y Y Y YY Y YY

Sample applied, antigen
binds to capture antibody

Y Y Y Y YY Y YY

Other cells and debris
washed away

Y Y Y Y Y Y YY
Y Y Y Y Y Y YY

Detection antibody
(( ))((
))
(( ))

Y Y Y YY Y

Y Y Y Y YY Y YY

Y

(( ))

Y Y Y Y Y Y YY

Laser on

Y Y Y Y YY Y

Y

(( ))
(( )) (( ))

Y

(( ((
)) ))

Y

(( ))

Detection antibody binds
to antigen and fluoresces
when laser turned on.

(( ))
(( ((
)) )) (( ))
(( ))(( ))(( ))

Figure 3 | Biosensor sandwich assay. Target antigen is bound by a capture antibody on the fiber optic waveguide. A fluorophore (Cy5)-labeled detection antibody is then attached to
form a sandwich assay. The fluorophore is excited by a laser to generate a detectable signal.

needs can be addressed, this assay is advantageous because

identifies bacteria cells which have been labeled with

live bacteria can be recovered from fiber optic waveguides

fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies. The RBD provides

after the assay to confirm viability or other analyses

graphical output with fluorescence intensity (x-axis), 90

(Kramer et al. 2002; Tims and Lim 2003). In addition, the

degree scattered laser light (y-axis) and count (z-axis) as a dot

fiber optic biosensor platform is portable and can be used by

density display (Figure 4). The operator defines an analysis

minimally-trained personnel in the field.

box to encompass the labeled bacterial cells and output is

Several other technologies under development rely upon

provided in counts per unit volume within the box at the end

the Ab-antigen binding mechanism. Lee and Deininger

of an eight-minute analysis time. Using controlled speed

(2004) have developed a system for trapping bacteria on a

centrifugation for preconcentration, AATI has been able to

filter, resuspending it in a small amount of buffer and

achieve detection in the 102/100 ml range within two hours.

washing it with a Fluor-Ab-magnetic bead mixture specific

AATI is also exploring use of the RBD with fluorochrome

to the bacterial species of interest. A magnetic field is used

labeled rRNA specific peptide nucleic acid (PNA) probes.

to separate the tagged bacteria from the remainder of the
sample. Bacterial cell counts are then assessed by determining the concentration of ATP in the sample using a

PCR-Based technologies

luciferase assay. ATP provides a measure of cell viability,

Q-PCR methods are sufficiently advanced that EPA has

as ATP degrades rapidly upon cell death (Deininger and Lee

already incorporated them into two epidemiology studies.

2001). In a California laboratory intercalibration study,

The methods that they have used are outlined in Haugland

enterococcus concentrations for six of eight ambient water

et al. (2005) and modifications of approaches used by

samples estimated using this method were within 10% of

Bernhard et al. (2003), with techniques for application in

the median concentration from 26 laboratories that used

water analysis described by Brinkman et al. (2003). Ambient

conventional culture-based methods.

water samples are collected on a polycarbonate filter,

The Advanced Analytical Technologies, Inc. (AATI)

followed by disruption of cells on the filter with glass bead

commercially available Rapid Bacteria Detection (RBD)

milling in buffer and brief centrifugation. Aliquots of the

system is based on laser-based flow-through technology that

supernatants are diluted, if necessary, to overcome PCR

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



389

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

Figure 4 | Rapid Bacterial Detection (RBD) analysis and enumeration of antibody labeled E. faecalis and E. faecium in concentrated ocean water. The left panel represents a negative
water sample (in box count of 6/0.25 ml), while the middle and the right panels represent artificially contaminated water samples from a dilution series with in box counts
of 44/0.25 ml (middle panel) and in box counts of 333/0.25 ml (right panel).

inhibition. Detection is accomplished using TaqManY

.0.995) with detection over a wide dynamic range from

chemistry in a real time PCR instrument (e.g. Cepheid

greater than 105 to less than 2 bacteria per reaction

Inc., Sunnyvale, CA). Specialized primer/probe sets have

(Blackwood et al. 2004).

thus far been used in assays for two groups of indicator
organisms, enterococci and Bacteroides-Prevotella spp.
Quantitative measurements of these organisms are obtained
either by comparing test sample cycle threshold values to a

IMPEDIMENTS TO IMPLEMENTATION

standard curve of values from similarly prepared DNA

While the largest technical impediment to implementation

extracts of known quantities of the target organisms, or by

of rapid methods is sensitivity, another factor that will limit

the comparative cycle threshold (CT) method. The com-

use of new methods is regulatory acceptance. Most

parative CT method employs an arithmetic formula to

recreational water quality monitoring is required by, or

determine target sequence quantities in DNA extracts from

conducted with funding from, EPA, whose approval will be

test samples relative to those in similarly-prepared DNA

necessary before most practitioners will transition to a new

extracts from calibration samples containing a known

method. Some of the testing necessary for approval, such as

quantity of the target organism cells (Brinkman et al.

demonstration of method accuracy, specificity, and pre-

2003). The method takes approximately 2 – 3 hr to perform.

cision, is relatively easy to accomplish. However, the most

An advantage of this method is that it is an extension of one

important criterion for evaluating acceptability of a

that has been used successfully for source identification

new method is a demonstrated relationship to human

(Field et al. 2003a,b; Bernhard et al. 2000, 2003), potentially

health risk.

providing additional information which can assist in health
risk management decisions.

A relationship to health risk is critical because current
water quality standards are based on epidemiology studies

Q-PCR methods specific for enterococci and other

in which exposure was assessed using culture-based

pathogens have been developed by Blackwood et al. (2004),

methods which measure some aspect of metabolic activity.

using multiplex reactions that allow for simultaneous

In contrast, most new methods, particularly nucleic acid

quantification of three targets, such as total enterococci,

methods, are based on measuring the presence of specific

E. faecalis and Salmonella spp., or total enterococci,

genes without assessing cell viability. As such, the new

Bacteroides spp., and adenovirus, yielding information

methods have the potential to overestimate health risk

that could potentially indicate source of fecal contami-

relative to present standards. Unfortunately, the epidemio-

nation and a link to public health risk. For example a

logical studies necessary to establish the health risk

multiplex assay has been developed for quantification of B.

relationship are expensive and time consuming. However,

thetaiotaomicron, Salmonella sp., and total enterococcus.

many of the rapid techniques described above are equally

Preliminary results demonstrate efficiencies in the multiplex

applicable to a wide array of microbes, perhaps allowing

reactions ranging from 95 –122% with no significant

adoption of indicators that have an even better relationship

differences in the slopes within a reaction (r-squared

to pathogens or health risk than occurs for existing methods

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



390

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

measuring current indicator bacteria (Jiang et al. 2001;

be recouped over time if enough analyses are run, although

Noble and Fuhrman 2001).

these costs may remain an impediment for smaller

For this reason, the enzyme substrate methods are most

laboratories.

likely to be the first rapid methods adopted for recreational
water quality. Enzymatic substrate methods are based on
the same capture technology as currently-approved EPA
methods, with greater speed attained through enhanced
detection technology. As such, the relationship to health
risk can be established by demonstrating that the new
detection capability produces equivalent results to existing
procedures.
Demonstration of equivalency may also be possible for
some surface recognition capture methods, such as antibody-based systems, which capture bacteria in a potentially
viable state. For instance, Deininger and Lee (2001)
combined immunomagnetic capture with a luciferase
measure of cell viability. However, such measures of
viability do not measure the same growth properties used
in the current approved methods, so it is unclear whether
they will provide comparable results. Epidemiological
studies would not be required, though, if equivalency with
existing methods could be demonstrated.
Epidemiology studies may also be required because of
improvements in capture approaches. New antibodies for
surface recognition, or new primers for nucleic acid
approaches, have the potential to increase capture specificity. Whereas present culture-based methods measure a
broad class of indicator organisms, such as enterococci, new

CONCLUSIONS
The development of rapid microbial indicator methods is
moving quickly and they will likely become available for use
within the next few years, allowing managers to take action
toward protecting swimmers from exposure to waterborne
pathogens on the same day that samples are collected.
Sensitivity is the major technological hurdle facing all three
classes of rapid methods, but this may be overcome through
a preconcentration step, which has the potential to boost
sensitivity without the need to develop new detector
technology.
In the short term, available methods are likely to be
based on technological improvements to existing enzyme/substrate-based methods that reduce incubation times from
overnight to a few hours and can be approved for use based
on demonstrated equivalency with current EPA approved
methods. Molecular surface recognition-based methods will
also become available soon, but may require inclusion in an
epidemiological study to gain EPA approval. Eventually,
rapid methods will gravitate toward newer nucleic acid
technologies, which are more versatile and sensitive, but are
still early in their development and will also require
inclusion in an epidemiological study for approval.

molecular methods provide the opportunity to capture
individual species, such as Enterococcus faecalis. This will
improve monitoring systems by allowing measurement of

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

indicators, or even the pathogens themselves most closely
associated with swimmer health. However, new epidemiol-

This review is based in part on presentations and findings at

ogy studies will be required to establish water quality

an Alliance for Coastal Technologies workshop on rapid

standards associated with the measurement of more specific

indicator methods held in Seaside, California in May 2003.

target organisms.

We thank the workshop participants for their input. We

Cost is another potential impediment to the adoption of

thank R. Haugland, J. Lee, C. Koerting, K. Harkins,

new technologies. Many new methods require sophisticated

A. DuFour, J. Griffith and D. Lim for providing helpful

detection instrumentation costing in excess of $30,000.

critiques and information for this review.

There are also additional training costs, as the technicians at
most public health agencies are unfamiliar with molecular
techniques. However, disposable material costs and personnel time required for analysis are generally less for the
new methods and the initial capital and training costs may

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest

REFERENCES
Babacan, S., Pivarnik, P., Letcher, S. & Rand, A. 2002 Piezoelectric
flow injection analysis biosensor for the detection of Salmonella
typhimurium. Journal of Food Science 67, 314– 320.



R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

Bavykin, S. G., Akowski, J. P., Zakhariev, V. M., Barsky, V. E.,
Perov, A. N. & Mirzabelov, A. D. 2001 Portable system for
microbial sample preparation and oligonucleotide microarray
analysis. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 67,
922 –928.
Bernhard, A. E., Goyard, T., Simonich, M. T. & Field, K. G. 2003 A
rapid method for identifying fecal pollution sources in coastal
waters. Water Research 37, 909–913.
Bernhard, A. E. & Field, K. G. 2000 A PCR assay to discriminate
human and ruminant feces based on host differences in
Bacteroides-Prevotella 16S rRNA. Applied Environmental
Microbiology 66, 4571 –4574.
Blackwood, A. D., Gregory, J. B. & Noble, R. T. 2004 Development
of a multiplex quantitative PCR assay using species-associated
bacterial indicators with specific types of fecal pollution in
environmental water samples. In Proceedings from American
Society for Microbiology National Meeting. ASM Press,
Washington, DC.
Boehm, A. B., Grant, S. B., Kim, J. H., Mowbray, S. L., McGee,
C. D., Clark, C. D., Foley, D. M. & Wellman, D. E. 2002
Decadal and shorter period variability and surf zone water
quality at Huntington Beach, California. Environmental
Science and Technology 36, 3885 –3892.
Brinkman, N. E., Haugland, R. A., Wymer, L. J., Byappanahalli, M.,
Whitman, R. L. & Vesper, S. J. 2003 Evaluation of a rapid,
quantitative real-time PCR method for cellular enumeration of
pathogenic Candida species in water. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 69, 1775 –1782.
Collier, J. L. & Campbell, L. 1999 Flow cytometry in molecular
aquatic ecology. Hydrobiologia 401, 34 –54.
Collins, R. A., Ko, L.-S., Fung, K.-Y., Chan, K.-Y., Xing, J., Lau, L.-T.
& Yu, A. C. H. 2003 Rapid and sensitive detection of avian
influenza virus subtype H7 using NASBA. Biochemical and
biophysical research communications 300, 507 –515.
Deininger, R. A. & Lee, J. 2001 Rapid determination of bacteria in
drinking water using an ATP assay. Field Analytical Chemistry
and Technology 5, 185 –189.
Deisingh, A. 2003 Biosensors for microbial detection. Microbiologist
2, 30 – 33.
DeMarco, D. R., Saaski, E. W., McCrae, D. A. & Lim, D. V. 1999
Rapid detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in ground beef
using a fiber optic biosensor. J. Food Protection 62, 711 –716.
DeMarco, D. R. & Lim, D. V. 2001 Direct detection of Escherichia
coli O157:H7 in unpasteurized apple juice with an evanescent
wave biosensor. J. Rapid Methods and Automation in
Microbiology 9, 241 –257.
DeMarco, D. R. & Lim, D. V. 2002 Detection of Escherichia coli
O157:H7 in 10- and 25-gram ground beef samples using an
evanescent wave biosensor with silica and polystyrene
waveguides. J. Food Protection 65, 596 –602.
Dubitsky, A., DeCollibus, D. & Ortolano, G. A. 2002 Sensitive
fluorescent detection of protein on nylon membranes. Journal
of Biochemical and Biophysical Methods 51, 47 –56.
Edberg, S. C., Allen, M. J. & Smith, D. B. 1989 National field
evaluation of a defined substrate method for the simultaneous

enumeration of total coliforms and Escherichia coli from
drinking water: comparison with presence-absence techniques.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 55, 1003 –1008.
Field, K. G., Bernhard, A. E. & Brodeur, T. J. 2003 Molecular
approaches to microbiological monitoring: fecal source
detection. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 81,
313– 326.
Field, K. G., Chern, E. C., Dick, L. K., Fuhrman, J., Griffith, J.,
Holden, P. A., LaMontagne, M. G., Olson, B. & Simonich,
M. T. 2003 A comparative study of culture-independent,
library-independent genotypic methods of fecal source
tracking. J. Water and Health 1, 181– 194.
Fung, D. Y. C. 2002 Rapid methods and automation in
microbiology. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and
Food Safety 1, 1– 20.
Heid, C. A., Stevens, J., Livak, K. J. & Williams, P. M. 1996 Real
time quantitative PCR. Genome Research 6, 986– 994.
Hartman, N. F., Wyvill, J. C., Campbell, D. & Edmonds, P. 1995
Rapid response biosensor for detection and identification of
common foodborne pathogens. In: International Society for
Optical Engineering (SPIE) Proceedings: Optics in Agriculture,
Forestry, and Biological Processing (eds Meyer G. E. &
DeShazer J. A.). SPIE Press, Boston, MA, pp. 128– 137.
Haugland, R. A., Siefring, S. C., Wymer, L. J., Brenner, K. P. &
Dufour, A. P. 2005 Comparison of enterococcus measurements
in freshwater at two recreational beaches by quantative
polymerase chain reaction and membrane filter culture
analysis. Wat. Res. 39, 559 –568.
Jadamec, J. R., Bauman, R., Anderson, C. P., Jakubielski, S. A.,
Sutton, N. S. & Kovacs, M. J. 1999 Method for detecting
bacteria in a sample. United States Patent No. 5,968,762 19
October 1999.
Jiang, S., Noble, R. T. & Chu, W. 2001 Human adenoviruses and
coliphage in urban-runoff impacted coastal waters of southern
California. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 179 –184.
Kasempimolporn, S., Saengseesom, W., Lumlertdacha, B. &
Sitprija, V. 2000 Detection of rabies virus antigen in dog saliva
using a latex agglutination test. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 38, 3098 –3099.
Kievits, T., nan Gemen, B., van Strijp, D., Schukkink, R., Dircks,
M., Adriaanes, H., Malek, L., Sooknanan, R. & Lens, P. 1991
NASBAY isothermal enzymatic in vitro nucleic acid
amplification optimized for the diagnosis of HIV-1 infection.
J. Virol. Methods 35, 273–286.
Kooser, A., Manygoats, K., Eastman, M. P. & Porter, T. L. 2003
Investigation of the antigen antibody reaction between antibovine serum albumin (a-BSA) and bovine serum albumin
(BSA) using piezoresistive microcantilever based sensors.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 19, 503– 508.
Kramer, M. F. & Lim, D. V. 2004 A rapid and automated fiber
optic-based biosensor assay for the detection of Salmonella in
spent irrigation water used in the sprouting of sprout seeds.
J. Food Protection 67, 46 – 52.
Kramer, M. F., Tims, T. B., DeMarco, D. R. & Lim, D. V. 2002
Recovery of Escherichia coli O157:H7 from optical

391

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest



392

R. T. Noble and S. B. Weisberg | Technologies for rapid detection of bacteria

waveguides used for rapid biosensor detection.
J. Rapid Methods and Automation in Microbiology 10,
93 –106.
Lee, J. & Deininger, R. A. 2004 Detection of E. coli in beach water
within 1 hour using immunomagnetic separation and ATP
bioluminescence. Luminescence 19, 31 –36.
Leecaster, M. K. & Weisberg, S. B. 2001 Effect of sampling
frequency on shoreline microbiology assessments. Marine
Pollution Bulletin 42, 1150 –1154.
Lim, D. V. 2000 Rapid pathogen detection in the new millennium.
National Food Processors Association Journal 2, 13 –17.
Lim, D. V. 2001 Rapid biosensor detection of foodborne microbial
pathogens. Microbiological Methods Forum Newsletter 18,
13 –17.
Lim, D. V. 2003 Detection of microorganisms and toxins with
evanescent wave, fiber optic biosensors. Proc. IEEE 91,
902– 907.
Lyon, W. J. 2001 Taqman PCR for detection of Vibrio cholerae O1,
O139, Non-O1, and Non-O139 in pure cultures, raw oysters,
and synthetic seawater. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 67(10), 4685 –4693.
Nistor, C., Osvik, A., Davidsson, R., Rose, A., Wollenberger, U.,
Pfeiffer, D., Emnéus, J. & Fiksdal, L. 2002 Detection of
Escherichia coli in water by culture-based amperometric and
luminometric methods. Water Science and Technology 45,
191– 199.
Noble, R. T. & Fuhrman, J. A. 2001 Enteroviruses detected by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction from the
coastal waters of Santa Monica Bay, California: low
correlation to bacterial indicator levels. Hydrobiologia 460,
175– 184.
Paul, J. H., Casper, E. T., Smith, M. C. & Fries, D. 2003 Use of realtime NASBA for monitoring coastal water quality. In 103rd
General Meeting of the American Society for Microbiology,
Washington, DC, Abs N-102.
Perez, F., Tryland, I., Mascini, M. & Fiksdal, L. 2001 Rapid
detection of E. coli in water by a culture based amperometric
method. Anal. Chim. Acta 427, 149 –154.
Reynolds, K. S., Gerba, C. P. & Pepper, I. L. 1997 Rapid PCR-based
monitoring of infectious enteroviruses in drinking water.
Water Science and Technology 35(11 –12), 423 –427.
Richmond, C. S., Glasner, J. D., Jin, H., Mau, R. & Blattner, F. R.
1999 Genome-wide expression profiling in Escherichia coli K12. Nucleic Acids Research 27, 3821 –3835.

Downloaded from http://iwaponline.com/jwh/article-pdf/3/4/381/396349/381.pdf
by guest

Journal of Water and Health | 03.4 | 2005

Rowe-Taitt, C. A., Golden, J. P., Feldstein, M. J., Cras, J. J.,
Hoffman, K. E. & Ligler, F. S. 2000 Array biosensor for
detection of biohazards. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 14,
785 –794.
Saiki, R. K., Scharf, S., Faloona, F., Mullis, K. B., Horn, G. T.,
Erlich, H. A. & Arnheim, N. 1985 Enzymatic amplification of
beta-globin genomic sequences and restriction site analyses for
diagnosis of sickle cell anemia. Science 230, 1350 – 1354.
Schiff, K. C., Weisberg, S. B. & Raco-Rands, V. 2002 Inventory of
ocean monitoring in the Southern California Bight.
Environmental Management 29, 871– 876.
Scott, T. M., Rose, J. B., Jenkins, T. M., Farrah, S. R. & Lukasik, J.
2002 Microbial source tracking: current methodology and
future directions. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 68,
5796 –5803.
Shelton, D. R., van Kessel, J. S., Wachtel, M. R., Belt, K. T. &
Karns, J. S. 2003 Evaluation of parameters affecting
quantitative detection of Escherichia coli O157 in enriched
water samples using immunomagnetic
electrochemiluminescence. Journal of Microbiological Methods
55, 717 –725.
Schneider, B. H., Edwards, J. G. & Hartman, N. F. 1997 Hartman
interferometer: versatile, integrated, optic sensor for label-free,
real-time quantification of nucleic acids, proteins, and
pathogens. Clinical Chemistry 43, 1757 –1763.
Tims, T. B., Dickey, S. S., DeMarco, D. R. & Lim, D. V. 2001
Detection of low levels of Listeria monocytogenes within 20
hours using an evanescent wave biosensor. Am. Clin. Labor
20, 28 –29.
Tims, T. B. & Lim, D. V. 2003 Confirmation of viable E. coli
O157:H7 by enrichment and PCR after rapid biosensor
detection. J. Microbiol. Methods 55, 141 –147.
Vaughan, R. D., O’Sullivan, C. K. & Guilbault, G. G. 2001
Development of a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM)
immunosensor for the detection of Listeria monocytogenes.
Enzyme and Microbial Technology 29, 635– 638.
Veal, D. A., Deere, D., Ferrari, B., Piper, J. & Attfield, P. V. 2000
Fluorescence staining and flow cytometry for monitoring
microbial cells. Journal of Immunological Methods 243,
191 –210.
Wu, C., Valdes, J. J., Bentley, W. E. & Sekowski, J. W. 2003 DNA
microarray for discrimination between pathogenic O157:H7
EDL933 and non-pathogenic Escherichia coli strains.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 19, 1 –8.

