Risk factors for waterborne enteric infections
John M. Balbus, MD, MPH, and Martha A. Embrey, MPH

Risk factors for waterborne enteric infections are deduced
primarily from outbreak surveillance data; however, in the
United States, only a fraction of the estimated water-related
outbreaks are reported through passive surveillance. In the
past several years, advances in molecular detection
techniques have furthered our knowledge about foodborne
and waterborne causes of gastroenteritis, allowing the
association of certain pathogens with biologic and
exposure-related susceptibilities in their hosts. This article
summarizes some of the recent data characterizing
susceptibility to three common waterborne pathogens:
Cryptosporidium, a protozoan; Norwalk-like virus; and the
bacterium Escherichia coli O157:H7. The infectious dose of
Cryptosporidium varies by several orders of magnitude by
strain, and repeated low-level exposure in drinking water may
be protective. Some people may be innately immune to
Norwalk-like virus, despite multiple exposures. A major risk
factor for E. coli O157:H7 infection is exposure to shallow
groundwater sources contaminated with animal waste. Curr Opin
Gastroenterol 2002, 18:46–50 © 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

Center for Risk Science and Public Health, The George Washington University
School of Public Health and Health Services, Washington, DC, USA.
Correspondence to John M. Balbus, MD, MPH, Center for Risk Science and Public
Health, The George Washington University School of Public Health and Health
Services, 2300 K Street, NW, Suite 201, Washington, DC 20037, USA; e-mail:
eohjmb@gwumc.edu
Current Opinion in Gastroenterology 2002, 18:46–50
Abbreviations
CDC

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

ISSN 0267–1379 © 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.

Recent outbreaks in the United States and Canada have
revived the public’s interest in waterborne diseases. In
addition, the 1996 amendments to the Safe Drinking
Water Act mandate that all customers of public water
systems receive a Consumer Confidence Report that details the sources of their water and the results of required
testing. Customers are urged to consult their physicians
for specific counseling about their risks from waterborne
exposures, both chemical and microbial. Physicians may
not be prepared to answer patients’ questions about waterborne risks. Clinical decision-making in diarrheal
diseases depends more on signs and symptoms than
on sources and transmission routes. Physician education tends to focus on diagnosis and treatment, with indepth consideration of cause left to the world of public
health.
But there are reasons for physicians to consider sources
of infection beyond becoming better patient information
resources. Although it may be impossible to tell the route
of transmission of a case of diarrhea from its symptoms,
the specific organisms causing waterborne, foodborne, or
directly transmitted illness differ qualitatively and quantitatively. For example, in the most recently reported
surveillance, 86% of cases of foodborne illness were
caused by bacteria, whereas 8% were caused by viruses
and 5% by parasites [1]. Conversely, of 10 waterborne
outbreaks of known infectious etiology reported in 1997
and 1998, 60% were caused by parasites and 40% by
bacteria [2]. At least four of the five outbreaks of unknown etiology were suspected to be viral in origin. Recognizing the situations in which patients are at risk for
specific types of organisms may lead to more effective
treatment, counseling, and prevention. For example, patients consuming water from an unfiltered surface water
source would be more likely to encounter a protozoan
such as Cryptosporidium, whereas patients using an unchlorinated, shallow well may be at risk from bacteria
such as Escherichia coli O157:H7.
Individual patients differ in their risks of becoming ill
because of waterborne (or foodborne) exposures. These
differences may be related to differences in patients’
probability of exposure, or they may be related to physiologic or immune factors that alter the probability of
infection or more severe clinical disease. Elucidating and
characterizing these differences have become a priority
for the federal regulatory agencies, which have been
charged by Congress with ensuring that their standards
protect the most vulnerable within the population. A

46



Risk factors for waterborne enteric infections Balbus and Embrey 47

more thorough understanding of these differences has
clear clinical utility as well.
For pathogens transmitted through environmental media, there is a dynamic interaction among the pathogen,
host, and environment that determines whether the host
will become infected or develop symptoms. Variation in
pathogen phenotypes, host physiology, and environmental factors can all lead to increases or decreases in the risk
of infection. In addition to understanding differences
among people in their intrinsic risk of infection, it is
useful for clinicians to appreciate the differences in infection risk caused by variation among strains of pathogens. Although it is not possible to control the pathogen
phenotypes in most cases, understanding the role phenotypic variation plays in disease risk is crucial to interpreting data on the incidence and prevalence of enteric
infections.
This article summarizes recent advances in the conceptualization and understanding of susceptibility to waterborne pathogens. A series of studies has provided new
insights into the mechanisms by which waterborne microbial pathogens cause disease and the host responses to
infection. Although the focus of this article is waterborne
pathogens, both the conceptual framework and the clinical information on susceptibility are relevant to other
transmission routes.
Much of what is known about the risk factors in populations comes from outbreak data. In the United States,
waterborne disease outbreaks are tracked using voluntary passive surveillance techniques by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in collaboration
with the Environmental Protection Agency. State and
local health departments may report the epidemiologic
data from an outbreak to CDC, but reporting varies by
the type of outbreak, state, infectious agent, and time
period. Such data often do not include the demographic
or other characteristics essential for assessing interindividual differences in susceptibility. Exposure analysis is
also very limited, and water quality parameters are not
always included in the analysis.
The likelihood that individual cases of illness will be
detected, epidemiologically linked, and associated with
water is slim. For an outbreak to be detected, a series of
events must happen. First, people who are ill must consult a health care provider, and generally, at least two
patients must consult the same provider for an association to be made. Next, the health care provider must
recognize the possibility of an outbreak and perform appropriate laboratory testing or report the cases to a local
or state health department. The availability and patterns
of use of laboratory testing, the requirements for laboratories or physicians to report results to local or state

health departments, and the activities of state and local
health and environmental agencies all affect the likelihood that an outbreak will be recognized and reported.
Often, pathogens are not identified because the appropriate tests are not ordered. For example, most laboratories do not test for Cryptosporidium parvum on a routine
ova and parasites examination, and E. coli O157:H7 will
not be detected from a routine stool culture.
The most frequently identified etiologic agents traced to
both drinking water and recreational water outbreaks
representing the three pathogen classifications, protozoa,
viruses, and bacteria, are Giardia and Cryptosporidium,
Norwalk-like viruses, and E. coli O157:H7.

Cryptosporidium: immunity
and susceptibility
New insights have been gained into the role of humoral
immunity in cryptosporidiosis. Studies of the seroprevalence of Cryptosporidium IgG antibody show that exposure is more common than previously thought, is particularly high for people using surface water sources, and is
highest for those with unfiltered surface water sources.
One study by Frost et al. [3•] comparing antibody responses to Cryptosporidium between residents of Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Las Vegas, Nevada, found
associations between higher titers and increasing age,
residence in Las Vegas (which has a filtered surface water source, compared with Albuquerque’s ground water
source), and washing of produce with bottled water.
There was no association between antibody titers and
self-reported cryptosporidiosis-like illness. A second
study by Frost et al. [4•] examined longitudinal data on
Cryptosporidium antibody after installation of filtration in
the community water supply. Although no decline was
found in antibody levels 5 months after the switch, the

Table 1. Infectious doses for select waterborne
enteric pathogens
Study

Enteric pathogen

Okhuysen et al.
[8]

Protozoa
Cryptosporidium
parvum

Rendtorff [17]
Morgan et al.
[18]
Tilden et al.
[19]
†

Giardia lamblia
Bacteria
Aeromonas hydrophila
Escherichia coli
O157:H7
Virus
Norwalk-like virus

Minimum infectious
dose
101–103 oocysts
(depending on
strain)
101 cysts
107–109 CFU
<50 CFU*
101 PCR-detectible
units

*Estimated from outbreak data, not volunteer challenge studies.
†
Data from Moe Paper presented at Health Effects Stakeholder
Meeting for the Stage 2 DBPR and LT2ESWTR, US Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 1999. CFU, colony-forming unit.
PCR, polymerase chain reaction.



48 Gastrointestinal infections

study did show associations between recreational water
use and consumption of lake water with increased titers
of anti-Cryptosporidium IgG. A third study, also by Frost
et al. [5], investigated a cryptosporidiosis outbreak in Collingwood, Ontario. This outbreak was unusual in that it
affected the very young and visitors to Collingwood
much more than the adult residents of the town. In fact,
the low level of disease among adult residents led officials to question the existence of the outbreak. Serologic
study revealed higher baseline and postoutbreak antibody titers among Collingwood adults, suggesting that
reinfection did indeed occur. Another outbreak that has
revealed the role of previous exposure in lessening risks
from outbreaks occurred in Talent, Oregon, in 1992
[6••]. High rates of laboratory confirmed cryptosporidiosis in Jackson County, Oregon, suggested an outbreak;
however, illness in the town of Talent was not being
reported, so it was assumed that Talent’s water supply
must be free of pathogens. Two studies were performed:
one of employees of a long-term care facility in Medford
who had been given Talent water as a safeguard, and a
second of Talent and non-Talent residents who were
guests at a wedding. These two studies showed that
drinking Talent water was associated with illness primarily in nonresidents. The authors concluded that Talent
residents may have been exposed to low levels of Cryptosporidium over time, and that this exposure resulted in
their immunity when oocyst levels increased in an outbreak situation. Serology studies comparing Talent residents and nonresidents supported this hypothesis.
Several tentative conclusions can be drawn from these
studies regarding immunity, susceptibility, and cryptosporidiosis. First, exposure appears to be quite common
for users of surface waters for consumption or recreation.
Second, repeated exposure appears to produce both
long-lasting IgG titers and relative resistance to illness
after new exposure.
These conclusions are strengthened by data from human
volunteer dosing studies. A 1999 study by Chappell et al.
[7] demonstrated a 20-fold increase in ID50 among adults
with pre-existing anti-Cryptosporidium IgG compared
with seronegative adults. Of note, adults with the highest
levels of pre-existing IgG had the least increase in titer
after exposure, whereas adults with lower levels of preexisting IgG had significant increases in titers. Only approximately 54% of infected volunteers shed detectable
levels of oocysts, indicating a role of humoral immunity
in decreasing shedding. A more recent study by Okhuysen et al. [8] compared infectivity for different strains of
Cryptosporidia. All strains in this study were genotype C
strains obtained by passage through animal hosts. The
strains used in the study were TAMU (horse), UCP
(calf), and Iowa (calf). The variation in infectivity among
strains was great: the ID50 for the TAMU strain was nine

oocysts, whereas for UCP it was 1,024. The Iowa strain
ID50 was intermediate at 87 oocysts.
The role of immunity in altering susceptibility to C. parvum
is substantial, because pre-existing IgG raises the number of oocysts required to establish infection and cause
illness. Yet the studies discussed also indicate that variability among strains in infectivity is even greater, with
ID50 levels varying more than 100-fold. Thus, interpreting epidemiologic results that compare population rates
of cryptosporidiosis requires an understanding of the potential confounding by different strains among studies.

Norwalk-like virus: immunity
and susceptibility
The Caliciviridae family has two genera that include human pathogens: the Norwalk-like viruses and the Sapporo-like viruses. Both cause gastroenteritis, and Norwalk-like viruses are the most common cause of
nonbacterial gastroenteritis in the United States [9••].
Breakthroughs in the development of molecular detection assays (such as reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction) have allowed for much greater knowledge
of the role Norwalk-like viruses play in gastroenteritis
outbreaks. The CDC [9••] estimates that Norwalk-like
viruses caused 96% of 90 outbreaks of nonbacterial gastroenteritis in 1996 and 1997. Norwalk-like viruses have
a low infectious dose, allowing easy transmission through
aerosol droplets, food, water, and fomites, and person-toperson. Outbreaks are associated with a high rate of secondary and tertiary spread because viral shedding can
occur after symptoms have abated. Consequently, outbreaks commonly occur in institutional settings, with
30% of the 348 outbreaks between 1996 and 2000 associated with nursing homes. Restaurants, schools, day care
centers, and cruise ships were also common outbreak
sources.
Because the immunity for Norwalk-like virus is shortlived, and because there is such diversity in strains,
people of all ages are susceptible. Also, studies have
shown that people with the greatest level of Norwalklike virus antibodies are most likely to become sick given
infection [10], and that some people without antibodies
never become infected, even after multiple challenges
[11]. These data support the hypothesis that certain
people are genetically susceptible to becoming infected
and developing illness when exposed to Norwalk-like
viruses. Less is known about the Sapporo-like viruses,
but because they are seen primarily in young children, it
is believed that infection results in long-term immunity.

Escherichia coli O157:H7: exposure
and susceptibility
E. coli O157:H7 infection has been most commonly associated with the consumption of undercooked hamburger, but a number of waterborne gastroenteritis out-



Risk factors for waterborne enteric infections Balbus and Embrey 49

breaks have been traced to the bacterium, including the
Walkerton, Ontario, outbreak in May 2000 that infected
more than 2,300 people and killed six [12]. In that outbreak, the well supplying the municipal water was most
likely contaminated with cattle manure from a nearby
dairy farm, and faulty chlorination allowed the contamination to spread through the water system. Common factors of other E. coli-related waterborne outbreaks have
included lack of chlorination combined with animal feces
contamination in ground water [13,14•,15]. Ground water supplies approximately half the US population with
drinking water, yet only 55% of ground water systems
receive any sort of disinfection [16]. Three of four bacterial drinking water outbreaks reported to the CDC in
1997 and 1998 were caused by E. coli O157:H7 [2]. One
was associated with a community water system supplied
by untreated ground water that may have been contaminated by wildlife feces; one involved people who drank
untreated well water near a cattle pasture; and one occurred in a chlorinated groundwater supply that was operating out of compliance. Interestingly, as with the cryptosporidiosis outbreak in Talent, Oregon [6••], an E. coli
outbreak in Scotland included only visitors who drank
from the contaminated water supply; permanent residents who regularly drank from the untreated private
source were unaffected [14•]. Clearly, groundwater or
untreated surface water that is in danger of contact with
animal—especially cattle—waste and is not adequately
chlorinated is a major risk factor in waterborne enterotoxigenic E. coli infections; furthermore, it is possible
that people exposed to low levels of the pathogen in
their normal drinking water are immune from illness in
an outbreak situation.

Conclusions
The picture that emerges from these studies is complex.
The role of various components of the immune system in
responding to enteric pathogens varies from pathogen to
pathogen. For Cryptosporidium, exposure seems to result
in partial immunity, with longer lasting and more effective immunity resulting from repeated exposure. For
Norwalk-like viruses, exposure does not convey immunity; in fact, immune markers of exposure may indicate
greater susceptibility to infection, rather than the opposite. Clinically, this information may have several applications. The studies of Cryptosporidium and E. coli suggest that even within the United States, there is
considerable regional variation in strains and species of
waterborne pathogens. Patients at risk for more severe
outcomes if infected, such as immunosuppressed patients or those with poor overall health, may encounter
new pathogens with travel or changes in residence, and
should be advised accordingly. The studies of Norwalklike viruses that suggest a portion of the population has
innate resistance to infection may lead to new approaches for treatment or vaccination. For now, clinicians
can use this information to more accurately assess water-

borne risks to their patients. Accurate and full reporting
by clinicians will improve the database and allow public
health researchers to characterize more fully the risk factors for waterborne infections.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review,
have been highlighted as:
•
Of special interest
••
Of outstanding interest
1

Olsen SJ, MacKinon LC, Goulding JS, et al.: Surveillance for foodborne disease outbreaks: United States, 1993–1997. MMWR CDC Surveill Summ
2000, 49(SS01):1–51.

2

Barwick, RS, Levy DA, Craun, GF, et al.: Surveillance for waterborne-disease
outbreaks: United States, 1997–1998. MMWR CDC Surveill Summ 2000,
49(SS 04):1–35.

3
Frost FJ, Muller T, Craun GF, et al.: Paired city Cryptosporidium serosurvey in
the southwest USA. Epidemiol Infect 2001, 126:301–307.
•
Researchers used blood donors to compare the serologic response to Cryptosporidium antigen. One group of donors came from a community that used chlorinated
surface water as drinking water (Las Vegas), and the other used chlorinated
groundwater (Albuquerque). Although Las Vegas residents had a significantly
higher serologic response than Albuquerque residents, comparisons of other obvious risk factors were not conclusive.
4
•

Frost FJ, Muller T, Calderon RL, et al.: A serological survey of college students
for antibody to Cryptosporidium before and after the introduction of a new
water filtration plant. Epidemiol Infect 2000, 125:87–92.
This article reports a serologic survey of college students comparing their responses to Cryptosporidium antigens before and after a change in municipal water
treatment practices. The results did not suggest a decrease in infection after filtration was instituted; however, swimming in and drinking untreated stream water
were predictive of a stronger response. The results may have been biased by a
seasonal trend in infection.
5

Frost FJ, Muller T, Craun GF, et al.: Serological analysis of a cryptosporidiosis
epidemic. Int J Epidemiol 2000, 29:376–379.

6
••

McAnulty JM, Keene WE, Leland D, et al.: Contaminated drinking water in one
town manifesting as an outbreak of cryptosporidiosis in another. Epidemiol
Infect 2000, 125:79–86.
An outbreak investigation of cryptosporidiosis included a case-control study of
nursing-home employees matched to the general community, a cohort study of
wedding guests, and a cross-sectional survey of the general community. The resulting data from these divergent sources suggested that residents of a community
with contaminated drinking water had developed some protective immunity to
Cryptosporidium, but when visitors to the community or the immunocompromised
were exposed to the drinking water, an actual outbreak was identified.
7

Chappell CL, Okhuysen PC, Sterling CR, et al.: Infectivity of Cryptosporidium
parvum in healthy adults with pre-existing anti-C. parvum serum immunoglobulin G. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999, 60:157–164.

8

Okhuysen PC, Chappell CL, Crabb JH, et al.: Virulence of three distinct Cryptosporidium parvum isolates for healthy adults. J Infect Dis 1999, 180:1275–
1281.

9
CDC: Norwalk-like viruses: public health consequences and outbreak management. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2001, 50(RR-9):1–17.
••
This report reviews the state of the science on Norwalk-like viruses, which, through
molecular detection techniques, have been identified as a primary cause of viral
gastroenteritis in outbreaks. Updated information on taxonomy and diagnostic
methods is included.
10

Johnson PC, Mathewson JJ, DuPont HL, et al.: Multiple-challenge study of
host susceptibility to Norwalk gastroenteritis in US adults. J Infect Dis 1990,
161:18–21.

11

Moe CL, Stewart P, Frelinger JA, et al.: 2000 progress report: studies of the
infectivity of Norwalk and Norwalk-like viruses [National Center for Environmental Research, Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency Web site]. May 17, 2001. Available at: http://es.epa.
gov/ncer/progress/grants/97/dwater/moe00.html. Accessed August 10,
2001.

12

Health Canada: Waterborne outbreak of gastroenteritis associated with contaminated municipal water supply, Walkerton, Ontario, May–June 2000. Can
Commun Dis Rep 2000, 26:170–173.

13

CDC: Public health dispatch: outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and
Campylobacter among attendees of the Washington County Fair: New York,
1999. MMWR 1999, 48:803

14
•

Licence K, Oates KR, Synge BA, et al.: An outbreak of E. coli O157 infection
with evidence of spread from animals to man through contamination of a private water supply. Epidemiol Infect 2001, 126:135–138.



50 Gastrointestinal infections
An outbreak of E. coli O157 was traced to animal contamination when pulsed field
gel electrophoresis methodology determined that isolates from patients’ stool
samples, sheep feces, and an unprotected water source were indistinguishable.
15

Swerdlow DL, Woodruff BA, Brady RC, et al.: A waterborne outbreak in Missouri of Escherichia coli O157:H7 associated with bloody diarrhea and
death. Ann Intern Med 1992, 117:812–819.

16

Fujioka RS, Yoneyama BS: Assessing the vulnerability of groundwater
sources to fecal contamination. J Am Water Works Assoc 2001, 93:62–71.

17

Rendtorff RC: The experimental transmission of human intestinal protozoan
parasites II: Giardia lamblia cysts given in capsules. Am J Hygiene 1954,
59:209–220.

18

Morgan DR, Johnson PC, DuPont HL, et al.: Lack of correlation between
known virulence properties of Aeromonas hydrophila and enteropathogenicity for humans. Infect Immun 1985, 50:62–65.

19

Tilden J Jr, Young W, McNamara AM, et al.: A new route of transmission for
Escherichia coli: infection from dry fermented salami. Am J Public Health
1996, 86:1142–1145.

