Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7, 3657-3703; doi:10.3390/ijerph7103657
OPEN ACCESS

International Journal of
Environmental Research and
Public Health
ISSN 1660-4601
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Review

Water Microbiology. Bacterial Pathogens and Water
João P. S. Cabral
Center for Interdisciplinary Marine and Environmental Research (C. I. I. M. A. R.),
Faculty of Sciences, Oporto University, Rua do Campo Alegre, 4169-007 Oporto,
Portugal; E-Mail: jpcabral@fc.up.pt; Tel.: +351-220402751; Fax: +351-220402799.
Received: 19 August 2010; in revised form: 7 September 2010 / Accepted: 28 September 2010 /
Published: 15 October 2010

Abstract: Water is essential to life, but many people do not have access to clean and safe
drinking water and many die of waterborne bacterial infections. In this review a general
characterization of the most important bacterial diseases transmitted through water—
cholera, typhoid fever and bacillary dysentery—is presented, focusing on the biology and
ecology of the causal agents and on the diseases‘ characteristics and their life cycles in the
environment. The importance of pathogenic Escherichia coli strains and emerging
pathogens in drinking water-transmitted diseases is also briefly discussed. Microbiological
water analysis is mainly based on the concept of fecal indicator bacteria. The main bacteria
present in human and animal feces (focusing on their behavior in their hosts and in the
environment) and the most important fecal indicator bacteria are presented and discussed
(focusing on the advantages and limitations of their use as markers). Important sources of
bacterial fecal pollution of environmental waters are also briefly indicated. In the last topic
it is discussed which indicators of fecal pollution should be used in current drinking water
microbiological analysis. It was concluded that safe drinking water for all is one of the
major challenges of the 21st century and that microbiological control of drinking water
should be the norm everywhere. Routine basic microbiological analysis of drinking water
should be carried out by assaying the presence of Escherichia coli by culture methods.
Whenever financial resources are available, fecal coliform determinations should be
complemented with the quantification of enterococci. More studies are needed in order to
check if ammonia is reliable for a preliminary screening for emergency fecal pollution
outbreaks. Financial resources should be devoted to a better understanding of the ecology
and behavior of human and animal fecal bacteria in environmental waters.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3658

Keywords: drinking water; cholera; typhoid fever; bacillary dysentery; fecal indicator
bacteria; coliforms; ammonia

1. Drinking Water as a Vehicle of Diseases
Water is essential to life. An adequate, safe and accessible supply must be available to all.
Improving access to safe drinking-water can result in significant benefits to health. Every effort should
be made to achieve a drinking water quality as safe as possible [1].
Many people struggle to obtain access to safe water. A clean and treated water supply to each house
may be the norm in Europe and North America, but in developing countries, access to both clean water
and sanitation are not the rule, and waterborne infections are common. Two and a half billion people
have no access to improved sanitation, and more than 1.5 million children die each year from diarrheal
diseases [2]. According to the WHO, the mortality of water associated diseases exceeds 5 million
people per year. From these, more that 50% are microbial intestinal infections, with cholera standing
out in the first place.
In general terms, the greatest microbial risks are associated with ingestion of water that is
contaminated with human or animal feces. Wastewater discharges in fresh waters and costal seawaters
are the major source of fecal microorganisms, including pathogens [1-4].
Acute microbial diarrheal diseases are a major public health problem in developing countries.
People affected by diarrheal diseases are those with the lowest financial resources and poorest
hygienic facilities. Children under five, primarily in Asian and African countries, are the most affected
by microbial diseases transmitted through water [5].
Microbial waterborne diseases also affect developed countries. In the USA, it has been estimated
that each year 560,000 people suffer from severe waterborne diseases, and 7.1 million suffer from a
mild to moderate infections, resulting in estimated 12,000 deaths a year [6]. The most important
bacterial diseases transmitted through water are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. The main bacterial diseases transmitted through drinking water.
Disease

Causal bacterial agent

Cholera
Gastroenteritis caused by vibrios

Vibrio cholerae, serovarieties O1 and O139
Mainly Vibrio parahaemolyticus

Typhoid fever and other serious
salmonellosis

Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Paratyphi
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhi
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium
Shigella dysenteriae
Shigella flexneri
Shigella boydii
Shigella sonnei
Escherichia coli, particularly serotypes such as O148,
O157 and O124

Bacillary dysentery or shigellosis

Acute diarrheas and gastroenteritis



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3659

2. Cholera
2.1. The Genus Vibrio
Vibrio are small, curved-shaped Gram-negative rods, with a single polar flagellum. Vibrios are
facultative anaerobes capable of both fermentative and respiratory metabolism. Sodium stimulates
growth of all species and is an absolute requirement for most. Most species are oxidase-positive and
reduce nitrate to nitrite. Cells of certain species (V. cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus)
have pili (fimbriae), structures composed of protein TcpA. TcpA formation is co-regulated with
cholera toxin expression and is a key determinant of in vivo colonization (see below) [7,8].
Several Vibrio species can infect humans (Table 2). V. cholerae is, by far, the most important of
these species. V. alginolyticus has been isolated from several types of soft tissue infections.
Table 2. Main species of Vibrio and their occurrence in human clinical specimens a.

Main species
Vibrio alginolyticus
Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139
Vibrio cholerae non O1 or O139
Aliivibrio fischeri (Vibrio fischeri)
Vibrio fluvialis
Vibrio furnissii
Vibrio harveyi
Grimontia hollisae (Vibrio hollisae)
Vibrio mimicus
Vibrio natriegens
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Vibrio vulnificus

Occurrence in human
clinical specimens
Intestinal
Extra-intestinal
+
+++++
++
++
++
++
++
++++
+

++
+
++
+
+
+
+++

a

Adapted from [7,8]. Nomenclature according to [9]. The symbols give the relative
frequency of each organism in human clinical specimens, and apply to the whole
World, rather than to a particular country.

V. fluvialis, Grimontia hollisae (V. hollisae), and V. mimicus can cause diarrhea or infections of the
gastrointestinal tract. V. furnissii has been isolated from a few individuals with diarrhea, but there is no
evidence that it can actually cause this pathology. V. parahaemolyticus is a well-documented causal
agent of acute food-borne gastroenteritis, particularly in Japan and South East Asia. Cases are
associated with the consumption of raw or undercooked shellfish such as oysters, shrimp, crabs, and
lobster. V. vulnificus is an important cause of (often fatal) septicemia and wound infections.
Other vibrios, namely Allivibrio fischeri (Vibrio fischeri) and V. natriegens, have no relation with
humans [7,8].
Vibrios are primarily aquatic bacteria. Species distribution depends on sodium concentration and
water temperature. Vibrios are very common in marine and estuarine environments, living free or on



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3660

the surfaces and in the intestinal contents of marine animals. Species with a low sodium requirement
are also found in freshwater habitats [7,8].
2.2. The Species Vibrio cholerae
Vibrio cholerae cells can grow at 40 °C with pH 9–10. The growth is stimulated by the presence of
sodium chloride. Vibrio cholerae is a very diverse bacterial species (Table 3). It is divided in ca. 200
serovarieties, characterized by the structure of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (O antigens). Only
serovarieties O1 and O139 are involved in ―true‖ cholera. Some other serovarieties can cause
gastroenteritis, but not cholera. The distinction between Classical and El Tor biotypes is based on
biochemical and virological characteristics [1,7,8,10,11].
Table 3. Subdivision of Vibrio cholerae below the species level a.
Serovariety

Serotype

Biotype

O1

Inaba

Classical
El Tor
Classical
El Tor

Ogawa
Hikojima
O139
others
a

Adapted from [8].

2.3. Cholera
2.3.1. Characterization of the disease
The incubation period for cholera is ca. 1–3 days. The disease is characterized by an acute and very
intense diarrhea that can exceed one liter per hour. Cholera patients feel thirsty, have muscular pains
and general weakness, and show signs of oliguria, hypovolemia, hemoconcentration, followed by
anuria. Potassium in blood drops to very low levels. Patients feel lethargic. Finally, circulatory
collapse and dehydration with cyanosis occurs [7].
The severity of the disease depends on several factors: (1) personal immunity: this may be
conferred by both previous infections and by vaccines; (2) inoculum: the disease only occurs after
ingestion of a minimum amount of cells, ca. 108 [1,7,8,10,11]; (3) The gastric barrier: V. cholera cells
likes basic media and therefore the stomach, normally very acidic, is an adverse medium for bacterial
survival. Patients consuming anti-acidic medications are more susceptible to infection than healthy
people; (4) blood group: for still unknown reasons, people with O-group blood are more susceptible
than others [1,7,8,10,11].
In the absence of treatment, the mortality of cholera-patients is ca. 50%. It is mandatory to replace
not only lost water but also lost salts, mainly potassium. In light dehydrations, water and salts can be
orally-administered, but in severe conditions, rapid and intravenous-administration is obligatory. The
most efficient antibiotic is currently doxicyclin. If no antibiotic is available for treatment, the



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3661

administration of water with salts and sugar can, in many cases, save the patient and help in the
recovery [1,7,8,10,11].
There are two main determinants of infection: (1) the adhesion of the bacterial cells to the intestinal
mucous membrane. This depends on the presence of pili and adesins at the cell‘s surface; (2) the
production of cholera toxin [1,7,8,10,11].
2.3.2. Cholera toxin
Cholera toxin is an exotoxin with a very precise action on target cells. The toxin attaches to a
specific receptor (ganglioside Gl) on the cell membrane of intestinal cells and activates the enzyme
adenylate cyclase. This results in a non-stop degradation of internal ATP, with release of cAMP and
inorganic phosphate. The rise in the internal concentration of cAMP causes an efflux of water, sodium,
potassium, chloride and carbonate ions from the cells of the mucous membrane, and this is the main
cause of diarrhea [7].
2.3.3. Cholera pandemics and the emergence of El Tor biotype and O139 serovariety. New facts about
cholera epidemiology
Cholera has been a well known disease since the 19th century. In the 19th and 20th centuries, seven
major pandemics are recognized. The first six pandemics occurred during the following periods: 1st:
1816–1826, 2nd: 1829–1851, 3rd: 1852–1860, 4th: 1863–1875, 5th: 1881–1896, 6th: 1899–1923.
These pandemics all started in Asia, passed through Europe and then reached South America. The
Classical biotype was involved. The seventh pandemic, still in course, started in 1961 in the Celebes
Isles, in Asia. In the 1960s, the disease spread through Asia, in the 1970s reached the Middle East and
Africa, and in 1991 streaked violently across South America. Now El Tor has replaced the Classical
biotype. El Tor biotype had been detected before, in 1905, but only in the development of the seventh
pandemic did this biotype replace the Classical one and become dominant [1,7,8,10,11].
In 1992, a new serovariety (O139), which was coined the Bengal serovariety, was detected for the
first time in Bangladesh. This new serovariety quickly spread to India and to southeastern Asia,
displacing O1. Although serovariety O1 El Tor has reappeared in 1994 and 1995, the Bengal
serovariety still remains the dominant one. The illness caused by serovarieties O139 and O1 are
indistinguishable [8,12,13].
In 1991, the seventh pandemic entered South America through the coastal area of Peru. On 23
January, in Chancay, north Peru, Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor was isolated from patients with cholera
symptoms, confirming the disease. In this region, between 24 January and 9 February, 1,859 people
were hospitalized and 66 died. From Peru, the disease spread rapidly to other countries in South
America. Two routes have been proposed for the entrance of the bacterium in Peru: (1) ballast water
from a boat coming from Asia; (2) the El Niño current may have transported zooplankton harboring
V. cholerae cells. Shellfish and fish nourishing on this zooplankton became contaminated and the
bacterium was transmitted to humans who ate these marine foods [14-17].
The misfortune of people who died in the first months of this disastrous South American cholera
epidemic appeared to have unleashed scientists to study the disease harder and, indeed, important



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3662

epidemiological studies were carried out during this outbreak. These studies confirmed that
contaminated uncooked food and beverages can also be a vehicle for transmission of cholera [18].
2.3.4. Genes for toxin and pili protein production
The genes responsible for toxin production are harbored in the CTXΦ segment (7–9.7 kb) of the
chromosome (only in toxigenic strains). The CTXΦ segment carries at least six genes. In addition to
the gene encoding cholera toxin production, this segment (virulence cassette) include an accessory
cholera toxin (ace), a zonula occludens toxin (zot), core encoded pilin (cep), and an open reading
frame of unknown function. During the replication of the chromosome, the CTXΦ fragment can form
an autonomous copy and this can constitute an independent plasmid. The plasmid can give rise to
virus-like particles—CTXΦ bacteriophages, which can infect non-toxigenic strains. The CTXΦ
segment incorporates into the chromosome of the infected cells which became toxigenic. This process
was demonstrated in vitro in cell suspensions and in vivo in the gut of the rat [8,13,19,20].
Epidemic and pandemic strains of V. cholerae contain another chromosomal segment designated as
VPI. VPI is 39.5 kb in size and contains two ToxR-regulated genes: a regulator of virulence genes
(ToxT) and a gene cluster containing colonization factors, including the toxin co-regulated pili (TCP).
The tcp gene encodes for the 20.5-kDa TcpA pili protein. This VPI segment appears to be transferable
from V. cholerae O1 to non-O1 strains. V. cholerae O139 strains, like O1, carry the structural genes
encoded by the CTX operon and TCP. V. cholerae strains non-O1 or O139 normally lack cholera toxin
genes and have never been found to carry TCP [8].
2.3.5. Ecology of the bacterium and the cycle of the disease
V. cholerae non-O1 or O139 strains are common in the environment, especially in estuaries. They
have been isolated from many estuarine animals such as birds, frogs, fishes and shellfish, and survive
and multiply on the surface of phytoplankton and zooplankton cells [8,21].
V. cholerae O1 and O139 strains are isolable from the environment only in epidemic areas. They
survive in the cultivable state in water and aquatic and marine organisms for a considerable period of
time [8,12,22-24]. When V. cholerae cells face adverse environmental conditions, they reduce cell size,
became coccoid and enter a dormant stage inside exopolysaccharide biofilms. Cells display a certain
metabolism, but are not able to growth and multiply on the surface of agarized media and give rise to
colonies. Cells in this viable but non-culturable state retain viability as well as the potential for
pathogenicity for significant periods of time [25-27].
Viable but non-culturable cells can leave their dormant stage and multiply again, resulting in an
explosion of their concentration in the environment. Since the presence of non-toxigenic strains is
common in aquatic milieu, especially in estuaries, if a horizontal transfer of cholera exotoxin producing
genes occurs between toxigenic and non-toxigenic strains, the number of toxigenic cells in the
environment can rise rapidly and pronouncedly. The episodic nature and the sudden appearance of
violent cholera outbreaks, followed by a rapid slowing down, are probably related with these phenomena.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3663

3. Salmonellosis
3.1. The Genus Salmonella. Pathogenicity of Main Serovars
The genus Salmonella was designated by Lignières in 1900 [28,29]. Antigenic analysis began when
Castellani described, in 1902, a method for absorbing antisera. The first antigenic scheme for
Salmonella was published by White in 1926, and subsequently developed extensively by Kauffmann,
in two classical works published in 1966 and 1978 [28,29]. The Kauffmann-White antigenic scheme
contained, by 1988, about 2,250 different serovars [28,29].
The genus Salmonella, a member of the family Enterobacteriaceae, include Gram-negative motile
straight rods. Cells are oxidase-negative and catalase-positive, produce gas from D-glucose and utilize
citrate as a sole carbon source. Salmonellae have several endotoxins: antigens O, H and Vi [28,29].
The concept ―one serovar-one species‖, in use for many years, is no longer acceptable. The
taxonomy and nomenclature of the genus Salmonella has been subject of debate since Le Minor and
Popoff proposed changes in a paper published in 1987. The issue was settled by a decision of the
International Committee on the Systematics of Prokaryotes and published in 2005. The current
taxonomy of the genus is presented in Table 4. According to the rules of bacterial nomenclature, the
names of the serovars are not italicized and the first letter must be a capital [28-30].
S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis is the most frequently isolated serovar from humans
all over the world. However, locally, other serovars can be predominant. In the period 1994–2004,
Tunisia was exposed to salmonellosis outbreaks in 1997, 1999, 2002 and 2004. In 1997, salmonellosis
outbreak was caused by serovar Mbandaka. In 1999, three salmonellosis outbreaks were reported from
hospitals located in three different regions. Each outbreak was associated with a different serotype:
Mbandaka, Livingstone and Typhi Vi+. In 2002, a S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Livingstone
infection occurred in the same hospital that reported an outbreak caused by serovar Typhi Vi+ in 1999,
but in a different unit. In that year, the Livingstone serovar jumped to the first position in human
infection in Tunisia. In 2004, a second outbreak by serovar Typhi Vi+ was reported. The source of
isolation was a fermented juice traditionally extracted from palm-tree [31].
3.2. Characterization of the Diseases
Salmonellae pathogenic to humans can cause two types of salmonellosis: (1) typhoid and paratyphoid
fever (do not confuse with typhus, a disease caused by a rickettsia); (2) gastroenteritis [28]. Low
infective doses (less than 1,000 cells) are sufficient to cause clinical symptoms. Salmonellosis of
newborns and infants presents diverse clinical symptoms, from a grave typhoid-like illness with
septicemia to a mild or asymptomatic infection. In pediatric wards, the infection is usually transmitted
by the hands of staff [29].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3664

Table 4. Current taxonomy and nomenclature of the genus Salmonella. Habitat and
pathogenicity of main serovars a.
Species

Sub-species

Main serovars
(from a total of ca.
1,443)

Salmonella
enterica

Salmonella
enterica subsp.
enterica

Abortusovis
Choleraesuis
Enteritidis

Gallinarum
Paratyphi A
Paratyphi B
Paratyphi C
Typhi

Typhimurium

Typhisuis
At least 94 serovars.

Salmonella
enterica subsp.
arizonae
Salmonella
enterica subsp.
diarizonae
Salmonella
enterica subsp.
houtenae
Salmonella
enterica subsp.
indica
Salmonella
enterica subsp.
salamae

Habitat and pathogenicity
Pathogenic to sheeps.
Pathogenic to humans and animals.
Ubiquitous and frequently the cause of infections in
humans and animals. Very frequent agent of
gastroenteritis in humans.
Isolated chiefly from chickens and other birds. Causal
agent of fowl thyphoid.
Pathogenic only to humans. Causes paratyphoid fever.
Causes paratyphoid fever in humans and very rarely
infects animals.
Causes paratyphoid fever in humans.
Pathogenic only to humans, causing typhoid fever.
Transmitted by water and food contaminated with
feces.
Ubiquitous and frequently the cause of infections in
humans and animals. Very frequently, the causal agent
of gastroenteritis in humans.
Pathogenic to swines.

At least 323 serovars.

At least 70 serovars.
Isolated mainly from cold-blooded animals and from
the environment. Not pathogenic to humans.
At least 11 serovars.

At least 488 serovars.

Salmonella
bongori

At least 20 serovars.
a

Adapted from [29]. Nomenclature according to [9].

Food-borne Salmonella gastroenteritis are frequently caused by ubiquitous Salmonella serovars
such as Typhimurium. About 12 h following ingestion of contaminated food, symptoms (diarrhea,
vomiting and fever) appear and last 2–5 days. Spontaneous cure usually occurs. Salmonella may be
associated with all kinds of food. Prevention of Salmonella food-borne infection relies on avoiding



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3665

contamination (improvement of hygiene), preventing multiplication of Salmonella in food (constant
storage of food at 4 °C), and use of pasteurization (milk) or sterilization when possible (other foods).
Vegetables and fruits may carry Salmonella when contaminated with fertilizers of fecal origin, or
when washed with polluted water [28].
The incidence of typhoid fever decreases when the level of development of a country increases (i.e.,
controlled water sewage systems, pasteurization of milk and dairy products). Where these hygienic
conditions are missing, the probability of fecal contamination of water and food remains high and so is
the incidence of typhoid fever [29].
3.3. Ecology of Salmonellae and the Cycle of Salmonellosis
The principal habitat of Salmonella is the intestinal tract of humans and animals [28]. Salmonellae
are constantly found in environmental samples, because they are excreted by humans, pets, farm
animals, and wild life. Municipal sewage, agriculture pollution, and storm water runoff are the main
sources of these pathogens in natural waters [1,32]. Salmonellae do not seem to multiply significantly
in the natural environment, but they can survive several weeks in water and in soil if conditions of
temperature, humidity, and pH are favorable [28].
Salmonellae isolated from environmental sources are predominantly non-Typhi or Paratyphi
serovars. In a study carried out in Tunisia during 1994–2004, S. enterica subsp. enterica serovars
Anatum, Enteritidis and Corvallis were the most common serotypes isolated from food. The great
majority of the strains were isolated from poultry, red meat, milk and dairy products, vegetables and
fruits. From environmental sources, 73% of the isolates were from tap water. Serovars Corvallis,
Enteritidis, and Anatum were the commonest [31]. Arvanitidou et al. [32] reported a comparative
study carried out in Rivers Aliakmon and Axios, in northern Greece, during a 1-year period, from May
2002 to April 2003. A total of 29 Salmonella species were recovered from the water samples. Many of
the isolated Salmonella serovars were of non-human animal origin such as Mbantaka, Virchow, Hadar,
Infantis and Senftenberg, commonly isolated from poultry farm.
Unlike cholera, humans infected with salmonellae can carry the bacteria in the gut without signs of
disease. Infected humans can harbor the bacteria for considerable periods of time. About 5% of
patients clinically cured from typhoid fever remain carriers for months or even years. These people can
be chronic holders of the bacterium in the gut, and constitute the main reservoir of the bacteria in the
environment [29].
The salmonellosis cycle in the environment can involve shellfish. Salmonellae survive sewage
treatments if suitable germicides are not used in sewage processing. If effluent from the sewage plant
passes into a coastal area, edible shellfish (mussels, oysters) can become contaminated. Shellfish
concentrate bacteria as they filter several liters of water per hour. Ingestion by humans of these
seafoods (uncooked or superficially cooked) may cause typhoid fever or other salmonellosis. Evidence
of such a cycle has been obtained by the use of strain markers, including phage typing [29].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3666

4. Shigellosis or Bacillary Dysentery
4.1. The Genus Shigella
Shigella are Gram-negative, non-sporeforming, non-motile, straight rod-like members of the family
Enterobacteriaceae. Cells ferment sugars without gas production. Salicin, adonitol and myo-inositol
are not fermented. Cells do not utilize citrate, malonate and acetate as sole carbon source and do not
produce H2S. Lysine is not decarboxylated. Cells are oxidase-negative and catalase-positive. Members
of the genus have a complex antigenic pattern, and taxonomy is based on their somatic O
antigens [1,33,34].
Table 5. Current taxonomy and nomenclature of the genus Shigella. Habitat and
pathogenicity of species a.
Species

Main serotypes Habitat and pathogenicity

Shigella dysenteriae

15 serotypes.

Shigella flexneri

8 serotypes
9 subserotypes

Shigella boydii

19 serotypes

Shigella sonnei

1 serotype
a

Intestinal pathogens of humans and primates, causing
bacillary dysentery.
Humans are the primary reservoir. A long-term carrier
state occurs in few cases.
Shigella dysenteriae serotype 1 causes more severe
disease then other serotypes and produces a potent
exotoxin (Shiga toxin). Large epidemics in developing
countries are commonly caused by serotype 1. Diseases
caused by other serotypes may be mild or severe.
Shigella sonnei illness is usually milder than that
caused by other Shigella species.

Adapted from [34]. Nomenclature according to [9].

4.2. Characterization of the Disease
The incubation period is 1–4 days. The disease usually begins with fever, anorexia, fatigue and
malaise. Patients display frequent bloody stools of small volume (sometimes grossly purulent) and
abdominal cramps. Twelve to 36 hours later, diarrhea progresses to dysentery, blood, mucus and pus
appearing in feces that decreases in volume (no more than 30 mL of fluid per kg per day) [34-36].
Although the molecular basis of shigellosis is complex, the initial step in pathogenesis is
penetration of the colonic mucosa. The resulting focus of Shigella infection is characterized by
degeneration of the epithelium and by an acute inflammatory colitis in the lamina propria. Ultimately,
desquamation and ulceration of the mucosa cause leakage of blood, inflammatory elements, and mucus
into the intestinal lumen. Under these conditions the absorption of water by the colon is inhibited and
the volume of stool is dependent upon the ileocecal flow. As a result, the patient will pass frequent,
scanty, dysenteric stools [37,38].
In order for Shigella to enter an epithelial cell, the bacterium must first adhere to its target cell.
Generally, the bacterium is internalized via an endosome, which it subsequently lyses to gain access to
the cytoplasm where multiplication occurs [37,38].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3667

4.3. Virulence Factors
S. dysenteriae serotype 1 produces high levels of a cytotoxic Shiga toxin. S. sonnei and S. flexneri
produce much lower amounts of this toxin. Shiga toxin binds to Galotl-4Galp (galabiose) glycolipid
receptors and inhibits mammalian protein synthesis by cleaving the N-glycosidic bond at adenine 4324
in 28S rRNA. The toxic mechanism is identical to that of the plant toxin ricin, produced by
Ricinus communis. Shigella also release a LPS endotoxin (O antigens), that cause an inflammatory
response [37,38].
Shigella 180- to 230-kb plasmids encode genes essential for virulence, namely for: production of
adhesins involved in the adherence of bacteria onto the surface of target epithelial cells; production of
invasion plasmid antigens (Ipa) that have a direct role in the Shigella invasion process; transport or
processing functions that ensure the correct surface expression of the Ipa proteins; induction of
endocytic uptake of bacteria and disruption of endocytic vacuoles; regulation of plasmid-encoded
virulence genes [37,38].
Shigella emerged from E. coli during evolution. The acquisition and evolution of the pathogenicity
island which encodes all of the genes required for cell invasion and phagolysosomal lysis, permitted a
major alteration in pathogenesis [37,38].
4.4. Risk Factors
Many studies have identified risk factors and protective effects for shigellosis incidence and fatality.
Despite gradual improvements in water supply, shigellosis continues to be endemic among the
disadvantaged populations living in the tropics, often among displaced populations following natural
disasters and political crises. In Guatemala, young children, the elderly, and 15–44-year-old males
were found to be most susceptible to S. dysenteriae serotype 1. In Sierra Leone, the attack rate was
higher among children younger than 5 years of age than in the rest of the population. In rural
Bangladesh, shigellosis was most common in children aged 1–2 years and in people 60 years or older.
In Dhaka, Bangladesh, it was found that shigellosis mortality was most common in severely
malnourished people of all ages, in children under 2 who were not being breastfed, and in all children
under 1. In a 3-year study carried out in Matlab, Bangladesh, during 1992 to 1994, it was found that
the incidence of S. dysenteriae serotype 1 and S. flexneri was highest in children under 2 followed by
children from 2 to 5. The location of S. dysenteriae serotype 1 risk varies in time but S. flexneri risk
areas were persistent in time. Neighborhoods near bazaars with many non-septic latrines were at
highest risk for S. dysenteriae serotype 1. S. flexneri was most common in flood-controlled areas. It
was concluded that S. dysenteriae serotype 1 risk was more related to hygiene and sanitation whereas S.
flexneri was more related to the environment [35].
4.5. Shigellosis through the World
The total number of Shigella episodes that occur each year throughout the World is estimated to be
164.7 million, including 163.2 million cases in developing countries, 1.1 million of which result in
death. Children under 5 account for 61% of all deaths attributable to shigellosis [35,36].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3668

Shigella species are not uniformly distributed in the world. S. dysenteriae is usually found in
densely populated areas of South America, Africa and Asia. Infections usually result in significant
epidemic outbreaks. Serotype 1 has been distinguished by both its virulence and its ability to produce
ravaging epidemics. It predominates in India, Malaysia and Guatemala. Serotype 2 predominates in
Yemen and Nigeria. S. flexneri is usually found in areas where endemic shigellosis occurs. S. boydii
occurs sporadically, except in the Indian subcontinent where it was first identified. S. sonnei usually
occurs in Western developed countries, such as France and USA [35,36].
Important epidemics were reported in the last decades: (1) in 1970 in Central America where
112,000 people were affected and 13,000 died; (2) in 1985, in Texas (USA), 5,000 people became
infected after ingestion of contaminated lettuce; (3) in May–June 1994, domestic cases of S. sonnei
infection were detected in several European countries, including Norway, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom. Epidemiological evidence incriminated imported iceberg lettuce as the vehicle of
transmission; (4) in 1996, in Paris, with 153 reported patients [33].
4.6. Ecology of Shigellae and the Cycle of Shigellosis
Shigella is typically an inhabitant of the intestinal tract of humans and other primates [1,33,34,36,39]. It
is typically spread by fecal-contaminated drinking water or food, or by direct contact with an infected
person. In water, shigellae can survive for at least six months at room temperature, and this high
survival favors transmission through water. Flies have been implicated on the transmission of Shigella
cells from human feces to foods. The hand is an important vehicle for transmission of shigellosis, since
S. dysenteriae serotype 1 cells survives for up to one hour on a human‘s skin and a very small
inoculum is required to unchain infection and disease. Indeed, studies on American volunteers
experimentally infected with Shigella have shown that as few as one hundred Shigella cells given
orally cause the disease in 25–50% of the cases. Resistance of Shigella to gastric juice certainly
accounts, although not exclusively, for this high infectivity [36,40]. Asymptomatic and
inappropriately-treated patients with shigellosis can harbor the bacteria in the gut and these appear to
be the main reservoirs of the bacteria in the environment [41].
Recent reports on the ecology of shigellae have brought new elements for the understanding of the
cycle of the disease. In environmental waters of regions with high numbers of shigellosis‘ cases, it has
been found that, although numbers of cultivable cells were low, genetic elements such as plasmids and
genetic fragments with bacteriophage origin, could be detected. Many of the genes that code for
exotoxin production are precisely found in these genetic elements. These results suggest that the
sudden rise of the number of virulent strains in the environment can result from the incorporation, by
cells with reduced virulence, of this type of genetic elements present in the waters. If this hypothesis is
confirmed, there is a certain similarity between the cholera and the shigellosis cycles in the
environment. It remains to be elucidated if shigellae can also exist in environmental waters in a viable
but non-culturable state, as vibrios [41].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3669

5. Pathogenic Escherichia coli Strains
E. coli strains isolated from intestinal diseases have been grouped into at least six different main
groups, based on epidemiological evidence, phenotypic traits, clinical features of the disease and
specific virulence factors. From these, enterotoxigenic (ETEC, namely O148), enterohemorrhagic
(EHEC, namely O157) and enteroinvasive serotypes (EIEC, namely O124) are of outstanding
importance and can be transmitted through contaminated water [42,43].
5.1. Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) Strains
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) serotypes can cause infantile gastroenteritis. The number of reports
of their occurrence in developed countries is comparatively small, but it is an extremely important
cause of diarrhea in the developing world, where there is no adequate clean water and poor sanitation.
In developing countries, these strains are the most commonly isolated bacterial enteropathogen in
children below 5 years of age, and account for several hundred million cases of diarrhea and several
ten of thousand deaths each year [42-44].
Disease caused by ETEC follows ingestion of contaminated food or water and is characterized by
profuse watery diarrhea lasting for several days that often leads to dehydration and malnutrition in
young children [42-44]. ETEC also are the most common cause of ―travelers‘ diarrhea‖ that affects
individuals from industrialized countries travelling to developing regions of the World [42-44].
5.2. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) Strains
Reported outbreaks had been associated mainly with the consumption of contaminated foods, such
as raw or undercooked ground meat products and raw milk. The primary reservoir of this bacterium
has been found to be healthy cattle [42,45,46].
E. coli serotype O157:H7 causes abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, and hemolytic uremic syndrome.
This bacterium produces Shiga-like toxins. The incubation period is 3–4 days, and the symptoms occur for
7–10 days. It is estimated that 2–7% of E. coli O157:H7 infections result in acute renal failure [42,45,46].
Although E. coli O157:H7 is not usually a concern in treated drinking water, outbreaks involving
consumption of drinking water contaminated with human sewage or cattle feces have been
documented. An increasing number of outbreaks are associated with the consumption of fruits and
vegetables (sprouts, lettuce, coleslaw, salad) contaminated with feces from domestic or wild animals at
some stage during cultivation or handling. EHEC has also been isolated from bodies of water (ponds,
streams), wells and water troughs, and has been found to survive for months in manure and
water-trough sediments [45,46].
Person-to-person contact is an important mode of transmission through the oral-fecal route. An
asymptomatic carrier state has been reported, where individuals show no clinical signs of disease but
are capable of infecting others [45,46].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3670

5.3. Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) Strains
Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) behave in many respects like shigellae. They are capable of invading
and multiplying in the intestinal epithelial cells of the distal large bowel in humans. The illness is
characterized by abdominal cramps, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, chills, a generalized malaise, and the
appearance of blood and mucus in the stools of infected individuals. [42,43,47].
EIEC strains were isolated, for instance, from 28 subjects in the Jesreel district of Israel during a
peak period for dysentery. An investigation in Croatia showed that E. coli O124 could frequently be
isolated from cases of gastroenteritis, enterocolitis, and dysentery. The dysentery was more common
among the older age groups, while the two other types of disease occurred equally in all age groups. A
1985 survey was carried out in Bankok, Thailand in which 410 children with diarrhea and an equal
number of control children without diarrhea were examined for the presence of strains of Shigella,
EIEC, and other pathogens. It was found that 17 of the children with diarrhea and six without yielded
EIEC [42,43].
Any food contaminated with human feces from an ill individual, either directly or via contaminated
water, could cause disease in others. Outbreaks have been associated with hamburger meat and
unpasteurized milk [47].
6. Emerging Waterborne Bacterial Pathogens
The emerging pathogenic bacteria of concern outlined here have the potential to be spread through
drinking water, but they do not correlate with the presence of E. coli or with other commonly used
drinking water quality indicators, such as coliform bacteria. In most cases, there are no satisfactory
microbiological indicators of their presence. More studies are needed in order to understand the real
significance and dimension of the diseases caused by water contaminated with these bacteria, and the
ecology of these pathogens [45].
6.1. Mycobacterium avium Complex (Mac)
The Mycobacterium avium complex (Mac) consists of 28 serovars of two distinct species:
Mycobacterium avium and Mycobacterium intracellulare. The importance of Mac organisms was
recognized with the discovery of disseminated infection in immunocompromised people, particularly
people with HIV and AIDS. Members of MAC are considered opportunistic human pathogens [45,48].
Mac organisms have been identified in a broad range of environmental sources, including marine waters,
rivers, lakes, streams, ponds, springs, soil, piped water supplies, plants, and house dust. Mac organisms have
been isolated from natural water and drinking water distribution systems in the USA [45,49,50].
The ubiquitous nature of Mac organisms results from their ability to survive and grow under varied
conditions. Mac organisms can proliferate in water at temperatures up to 51 °C and can grow in natural
waters over a wide pH range [45]. These mycobacteria are highly resistant to chlorine and the other
chemical disinfectants used for the treatment of drinking-water. Standard drinking-water treatments
will not eliminate Mac organisms but, if operating satisfactorily, will significantly reduce the numbers
that may be present in the source water to a level that represents a negligible risk to the general
population. The entryway of these mycobacteria in distribution systems is through leaks. Growth of



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3671

Mac organisms in biofilms is probably important for their continuous presence in distribution systems.
Slow growing mycobacteria can be found at densities greater than 4,000 per cm2 in the surface biofilm,
creating a potentially high level of exposure [48].
The symptoms encountered with Mac infections result from colonization of either the respiratory or
the gastrointestinal tract, with possible dissemination to other locations in the body. Exposure to Mac
organisms may occur through the consumption of contaminated food, the inhalation of air with
contaminated soil particles, or contact with or ingestion, aspiration, or aerosolization of potable water
containing the organisms [45].
With respect to water supplies, infection with M. avium and M. intracellulare has been well
documented. Unlike gastrointestinal pathogens, where E. coli can be used to indicate their potential
presence, no suitable indicators have been identified to signal increasing concentrations of Mac
organisms in water systems [45].
6.2. Helicobacter pylori
Helicobacter pylori has been cited as a major etiologic agent for gastritis and has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of peptic and duodenal ulcer disease and gastric carcinoma. However, most
individuals that are infected by this pathogen remain asymptomatic [45].
Using culture-based methods, H. pylori has not been isolated from environmental sources, including
water [45,51]. On the contrary, molecular methods have been successful in detecting this pathogen.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization has been successfully used to detect this pathogen in drinking water
distribution systems and other water bodies. Polymerase chain reaction has also been used to detect the
presence of H. pylori DNA in drinking water, especially associated with biofilms [45,51,52]. In
drinking-water biofilms, H. pylori cells rapidly lose culturability, entering a viable but non-culturable
state. In these biofilms, cells can persist for more than one month, with densities exceeding
106 cells per cm2 [51].
How the organism is transmitted is still not fully understood. However, the fact that it has been
recovered from saliva, dental plaques, the stomach, and fecal samples strongly indicates oral-oral or
fecal-oral transmission. Water and food appear to be of lesser direct importance, but they can still play
a significant role in situations with improper sanitation and hygiene [45].
6.3. Aeromonas hydrophyla
In recent years, A. hydrophila has gained public health recognition as an opportunistic pathogen. It
has been implicated as a potential agent of gastroenteritis, septicemia, meningitis, and wound
infections. It can play a significant role in intestinal disorders in children under five years old, the
elderly, and immunosuppressed people. [45,53,54].
Aeromonas hydrophila are Gram-negative, non-sporeforming, rod-shaped, facultative anaerobic
bacilli belonging to the family Aeromonadaceae. Although A. hydrophila is usually the dominant
species, other aeromonads, such as A. caviae and A. sobria, have also been isolated from human feces
and from water sources [45,54].
Aeromonas species, including A. hydrophila, are ubiquitous in the environment. It is frequently
isolated from food, drinking water, and aquatic environments [45,53,54]. In clean rivers and lakes,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3672

concentrations of Aeromonas spp. are usually around 102 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL.
Groundwaters generally contain less than 1 CFU/mL. Drinking water immediately leaving the
treatment plant has been found to contain between 0 and 102 CFU/mL. Drinking water in distribution
systems can display higher Aeromonas concentrations, due to the growth in
biofilms [45,55]. Aeromonas spp. have been found to grow between 5 °C and 45 °C [44,54]. A.
hydrophila is resistant to standard chlorine treatments, probably surviving inside biofilms [56].
The common routes of infection suggested for Aeromonas are the ingestion of contaminated water
or food or contact of the organism with a break in the skin. Drinking or natural mineral water can be
a possible source of contamination for humans. No person-to-person transmission has been
reported [45,54].
7. Microbiological Water Analysis
7.1. The Rationale of the Use of Fecal Indicator Bacteria
The most important bacterial gastrointestinal diseases transmitted through water are cholera,
salmonellosis and shigellosis. These diseases are mainly transmitted through water (and food)
contaminated with feces of patients. Drinking water can be contaminated with these pathogenic
bacteria, and this is an issue of great concern. However, the presence of pathogenic bacteria in water is
sporadic and erratic, levels are low, and the isolation and culture of these bacteria is not
straightforward. For these reasons, routine water microbiological analysis does not include the
detection of pathogenic bacteria. However, safe water demands that water is free from pathogenic
bacteria [57].
The conciliation of the two needs was met by the discovery and testing of indicator bacteria. Water
contaminated with pathogenic species also has the normal inhabitants of the human intestine. A good
bacterial indicator of fecal pollution should fulfill the following criteria: (1) exist in high numbers in
the human intestine and feces; (2) not be pathogenic to humans; (3) easily, reliably and cheaply
detectable in environmental waters. Additionally, the following requisites should be met if possible: (4)
does not multiply outside the enteric environment; (5) in environmental waters, the indicator should
exist in greater numbers than eventual pathogenic bacteria; (6) the indicators should have a similar dieoff behavior as the pathogens; (7) if human fecal pollution is to be separated from animal pollution, the
indicator should not be very common in the intestine of farm and domestic
animals [1,4,6,57,58]. The usefulness of indicator bacteria in predicting the presence of pathogens was
well illustrated in many studies, namely by Wilkes et al. [59].
7.2. The Composition of Human and Animal Feces
Microbiological analysis of the human feces was important in order to structure and validate the use
of fecal indicator bacteria in environmental waters. Bacteria present in feces are naturally derived from
the microbiota of the human gastrointestinal tract.
Although bacteria are distributed throughout the human gastrointestinal tract, the major
concentration of microbes and metabolic activity can be found in the large intestine. The upper bowel



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3673

(stomach, duodenum, and jejunum) has a sparse microbiota with up to 105 CFU/ml of contents. From
the ileum on, bacterial concentrations gradually increase reaching in the colon 1010 to 1011 CFU/g [60].
It has been estimated that at least 500–1,000 different microbial species exist in the human
gastrointestinal microbiota, although on a quantitative basis 10–20 genera usually predominate
(Table 6). The total number of microbial genes in the human gastrointestinal tract has been estimated
as 2–4 million. This represents an enormous metabolic potential which is far greater than that
possessed by the human host [60,64].
Table 6. Total viable count in feces of healthy humans (children, adults and elderly) a.
Microbial group

Log10 CFU/g feces

Bacteroides
Eubacterium
Bifidobacterium
Ruminococcus
Peptostreptococcus
Peptococcus
Clostridium
Lactobacillus
Propionobacterium
Actinomyces
Methanobrevibacter
Desulphovibrio
Fusobacterium
Enterococci
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia coli
Citrobacter
Klebsiella
Yeasts

11.3*
10.7*
10.2*
10.2*
10.1*
10.0*
9.8*
9.6*
9.4*
9.2*
8.8*
8.4*
8.4*
3.5–7.2**
5.9–8.0**
7.5–7.7**
3.3**
2.4**
1.0–2.5**

a

Adapted from [61-63]** and [64]*. * Values expressed as dry weight.
** Values expressed as wet weight.

The composition of feces from an individual is stable at genus level, but the species composition
can vary markedly from day to day. The relative proportion of intestinal bacterial groups can vary
between individuals [60,64].
The microflora of the human gastrointestinal tract is dominated by obligate anaerobes, which are
ca. 103 more abundant than facultative anaerobes. The main anaerobic genera are Bacteroides,
Eubacterium and Bifidobacteria. These organisms account for ca. 90% of the cultivable human fecal
bacteria. Bacteroides (mainly B. thetaiotaomicron and B. vulgatus) are the most abundant organism in
the human feces and account for 20–30% of cultivable bacteria. The most abundant facultative
anaerobes are Enterococci and Enterobacteriaceae. The main Enterobacteriaceae genera are
Escherichia, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Proteus and Enterobacter. Citrobacter and Klebsiella are present
in most individuals although in low numbers. Proteus and Enterobacter are only present in a minority
of humans [64].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3674

A variety of molecular techniques have been used to study the microbial composition of the human
gastrointestinal tract. Results yielded by these studies have shown that many microbes detected by
molecular techniques are not isolable by conventional culture-based methods. The presence of high
proportions of bifidobacteria detected by culture-based methods is not supported by the results of
molecular-based studies. However, the results of molecular-based approaches support many of the
findings derived from culture-based methods: the dominance of the obligate anaerobes over facultative
anaerobes; the presence of high counts of Bacteroides, Clostridium and Eubacterium [64].
Anaerobic bacteria such as Bacteroides and Eubacterium are not easily cultured by conventional
techniques since require incubation chambers with nitrogen atmosphere. Bifidobacterium and
Lactobacillus tolerate some oxygen but are fastidious bacteria growing very slowly in culture media.
Therefore, these four genera are not adequate to be used as indicators of fecal pollution (the
introduction of molecular techniques may improve the situation). Citrobacter, Klebsiella and
Enterobacter are present in low numbers in the human intestine and are widespread in environmental
waters, and therefore are also not suitable as indicators of fecal pollution. Clostridium, Streptococcus
and Escherichia do not suffer from these drawbacks. Therefore, their suitability as fecal indicators has
been tested since several decades.
7.3. Fecal Bacteria in Their Hosts and in the Environment
7.3.1. Bacteroides
The traditional genus Bacteroides included Gram-negative, non-sporeforming, anaerobic
pleiomorphic rods. Many species have been transferred to other genera—Mitsuokella, Porphyromonas,
Prevotella, Ruminobacter. Bacteroides are the most abundant bacteria in human feces. In animal feces,
on the contrary, Bacteroides are present at low numbers. Although anaerobic, Bacteroides are among
the most tolerant to oxygen of all anaerobic human gastrointestinal species. B. thetaiotaomicron is one
of the most abundant species in the lower regions of the human gastrointestinal tract. Bacteroides have
a high pathogenic potential and account for approximately two-thirds of all anaerobes isolated from
clinical specimens. The most frequently isolated species has been B. fragilis. The survival of
Bacteroides in environmental waters is usually much lower than the survival of coliforms [64,65].
7.3.2. Eubacterium
The traditional genus Eubacterium included anaerobic non-sporeforming Gram-positive rods. Some
species have been transferred to other genera—Actinobaculum, Atopobium, Collinsella, Dorea,
Eggerthella, Mogibacterium, Pseudoramibacter and Slackia. Cells are not very aerotolerant. Species
isolated from the human gastrointestinal tract include: E. barkeri, E. biforme, E. contortum, E.
cylindrioides, E. hadrum, E. limosum, E. moniliforme, E. rectal and E. ventricosum [64].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3675

7.3.3. Bifidobacterium
Bifidobacteria are Gram-positive, non-sporeforming, pleiomorphic rods. Bifidobacteria are
anaerobic (some species tolerate oxygen in the presence of carbon dioxide) or facultative anaerobic.
The optimum growth temperature is 35–39 °C. The genus Bifidobacterium contains ca. 25 species,
most of which have been detected in the human gastrointestinal tract [64-66].
Bifidobacteria are present in high numbers in the feces of humans and some animals. Several
Bifidobacterium species are specific either for humans or for animals. B. cuniculi and B. magnum have
only been found in rabbit fecal samples, B. gallinarum and B. pullorum only in the intestine of
chickens and B. suis only in piglet feces. In human feces, the species composition changes with the age
of the individual. In the intestine of infants B. breve and B. longum generally predominate. In the adult,
B. adolescentis, B. catenulatum, B. pseudocatenulatum and B. longum are the dominant species. In
both human and animal feces, bifibobacteria are always much more abundant than coliforms [64-66].
Bifidobacteria have been found in sewage and polluted environmental waters, but appears to be
absent from unpolluted or pristine environments such as springs and unpolluted soil. This results from
the fact that upon introduction into the environment, bifidobacteria decrease appreciably in numbers,
probably due to their stringent growth requirements. Bifidobacteria grow poorly below 30 °C and have
rigorous nutrient requirements. Reports on the survival of bifidobacteria in environmental waters
indicate that their survival is lower than that of coliforms [64-66].
The presence of bifidobacteria in the environment is therefore considered an indicator of fecal
contamination. Since some species are specific for humans and animals, the identification of
Bifidobacterium species present in the polluted water could, in principle, provide information on the
origin of fecal pollution [64-66].
A study carried out in a highly contaminated stream near Bologna, Italy, revealed that B.
adolescentis, B. catenulatum, B. longum, B. pseudocatenulatum and B. thermophilum were the most
representative species, whereas B. angulatum, B. animalis subsp. animalis (B. animalis), B. breve, B.
choerinum, B. minimum, B. pseudolongum subsp. globosum (B. globosum) and B. subtile occurred
only in low numbers [66].
Bifidobacteria are the less studied of all fecal bacteria, due to the technical difficulties in their
isolation and cultivation. Other Gram-positive bacteria, such as Streptococcus and Lactobacillus,
which may occur in higher numbers than bifidobacteria, can inhibit their growth. Although selective
media has been designed for the isolation of bifidobacteria from environmental waters, the outcome is
still unsatisfactory, with appreciable numbers of false positives and low recovery percentages [64-66].
7.3.4. Clostridia
The genus Clostridium is one of the largest genera of the prokaryotes containing 168 validly
published species. From these, 77 (including C. perfringens) are considered to belong to a united
group—Clostridium sensu stricto [64,67,68].
Clostridia are Gram-positive rods, forming endospores. Most of the clostridial species are motile
with peritrichous flagellation. Cells are catalase-negative and do not carry out a dissimilatory sulphate
reduction. Clostridia usually produce mixtures of organic acids and alcohols from carbohydrates



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3676

and proteins. Many species are saccharolytic and proteolytic. Some species fix atmospheric
dinitrogen [64,67,68].
The genus Clostridium includes psychrophilic, mesophilic, and thermophilic species. The major
role of these organisms in nature is in the degradation of organic material to acids, alcohols, CO 2, H2,
and minerals. Frequently, a butyric acid smell is associated with the proliferation of clostridia.
The ability to form spores that resist dryness, heat, and aerobic conditions makes the clostridia
ubiquitous [64,67,68].
Most species are obligate anaerobic, although tolerance to oxygen occurs. Oxygen sensitivity
restricts the habitat of the clostridia to anaerobic areas or areas with low oxygen tensions. Growing and
dividing clostridia will, therefore, not be found in air saturated surface layers of lakes and rivers or on
the surface of organic material and soil. Clostridial spores, however, are present with high probability
in these environments, and will germinate when oxygen is exhausted and when appropriate nutrients
are present [64,67,68].
C. perfringens ferment lactose, sucrose and inositol with the production of gas, produce a stormy
clot fermentation with milk, reduce nitrate, hydrolyze gelatin and produce lecithinase and acid
phosphatase. The species is divided into five types, A to E, on the basis of production of major lethal
toxins [68,69].
C. perfringens appears to be a universal component of the human and animal intestine, since has
been isolated from the intestinal contents of every animal that has been studied. Humans carry C.
perfringens as part of the normal endogenous flora. The main site of carriage is the distal
gastrointestinal tract. The principal habitats of type A are the soil and the intestines of humans, animals,
and birds. Types B, C, D, and E appears to be obligate parasites of animals and occasionally are found
in humans [68,69].
Clostridium perfringens is the most frequently isolated Clostridium in clinical microbiology
laboratories, although it seldom causes serious infections. C. perfringens is isolated from infections in
humans and the organism most commonly found in gas gangrene in humans. C. perfringens is most
commonly isolated from infections derived from the colonic flora, namely peritonitis or abdominal
abscess [68,69].
This organism is a common cause of food poisoning due to the formation of the enterotoxin in the
intestine. C. perfringens food poisoning is seldom fatal, being marked by diarrhea and nausea, with no
vomiting and no fever [68,69].
Sources yielding C. perfringens include soil and marine sediment samples worldwide, clothing,
raw milk, cheese, semi-preserved meat products, and venison. Like E. coli, C. perfringens
does not multiply in most water environments and is a highly specific indicator of fecal pollution.
Berzirtzoglou et al. [70] reported a comparative study on the occurrence of vegetative cells and spores
of Clostridium perfringens in a polluted station of the lake Pamvotis, in rural North-West Greece. The
numbers of C. perfringens varied according to the water depth. Sporulated forms were found in all
sampling sites with the exception of the surface sampling.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3677

7.3.5. Lactobacillus
Lactobacilli are non-sporeforming Gram-positive long rods. There are more than thirty species in
the genus. Most are microaerophillic, although some are obligate anaerobes. Cells are
catalase-negative and obtain their energy by the fermentation of sugars, producing a variety of acids,
alcohol and carbon dioxide. Lactobacilli have complex nutritional requirements and in agarized media
may need the supplementation with aminoacids, peptides, fatty-acid esters, salts, nucleic acid
derivatives and vitamins. Lactobacilli very rarely cause infections in humans [64].
7.3.6. Enterococci
Enterococci are Gram-positive, non-sporeforming, catalase-negative ovoid cells. Cells occur singly,
in pairs or short chains. Optimal growth for most species is 35–37 °C. Some will grow at 42–45 °C and
at 10 °C. Growth requires complex nutrients but is usually abundant on commonly used bacteriological
media. Cells are resistant to 40% bile, 0.4% azide, 6.5% sodium chloride, have β-glucosidase and
hydrolyze esculin. The enterococci are facultative anaerobic but prefer anaerobic conditions [64,71].
The genus was separated from Streptococcus in the 1980s. Enterococci form relatively distinct
groups. Members of such groups exhibit similar phenotypic characteristics and species delimitation
can be difficult. The E. faecalis group contains, among others, E. faecalis. The E. avium group
contains, among others, E. avium. The E. faecium group contains, among others, E. faecium, E. durans
and E. hirae. The E. gallinarum group contains, among others, E. gallinarum [64,71].
Most species are part of the intestinal flora of mammals, reptiles, birds, and other animals. In the
human digestive tract, E. faecalis is the prevailing species, although in particular situations, E. faecium
may predominate. In poultry, E. cecorum, E. durans, E. faecalis, E. faecium and E. hirae and dominate
the intestinal flora [64,71].
Enterococci have been increasingly isolated from a variety of nosocomial and other infections,
mainly from the urinary tract and wound infections, bacteremias, and endocarditis [64,71].
Although enterococci are considered only a temporary part of the microflora of plants, in optimal
conditions, cells can proliferate on their surfaces. E. casseliflavus, E. faecalis, E. faecium, E. hirae, E.
mundtii and E. sulfureus have been isolated from plants. They are generally isolated more often from
flowers than from buds or leaves [64,71].
Enterococci are naturally present in many kinds of foods, especially those of animal origin such as
milk and milk products, meat and fermented sausages. Enterococci are usually considered secondary
contaminants of food, although they often play a positive role in ripening and aroma development of
some types of cheeses [64,71]. Although soil is not a natural habitat for enterococci, cells can be found
in this habitat due to the transport by rain [64,71].
Environmental waters are not a natural habitat for enterococci and their presence in this milieu is
considered the result of fecal pollution. The most common species found in environmental waters are
E. durans, E. faecalis, E. faecium and E. hirae, and less commonly, E. avium, E. cecorum, E.
columbae and E. gallinarum. However, pristine waters in Finland have been reported to contain E.
casseliflavus [64,71].
In environmental samples (compost, sewage effluent, harbor sediments, brackish water and
swimming pool water), Pinto et al. [72] reported the isolation of E. casseliflavus, E. durans, E. faecalis,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3678

E. faecium, E. gallinarum and E. hirae. E. durans, E. faecium and E. hirae were isolated from all
sources except from harbor sediments. E. raffinosus was only isolated from compost and swimming
pool water. E. faecalis and E. faecium accounted for the vast majority of enterococcal strains.
7.3.7. Escherichia
Escherichia, a member of Enterobacteriaceae, are oxidase-negative catalase-positive straight rods
that ferment lactose. Cells are positive in the Methyl-Red test, but negative in the Voges-Proskauer
assay. Cells do not use citrate, do not produce H2S or lipase, and do not hydrolyze urea [73]. E. coli is
a natural and essential part of the bacterial flora in the gut of humans and animals. Most E. coli strains
are nonpathogenic and reside harmlessly in the colon. However, certain serotypes do play a role in
intestinal and extra-intestinal diseases, such as urinary tract infections [43]. In a study of the enteric
bacteria present in the feces of Australian mammals, Gordon and FitzGibbon [74] reported that E. coli was
the commonest species, being isolated from nearly half of the species studied.
7.3.8. Citrobacter
Citrobacter, a member of Enterobacteriaceae, are motile straight rods. Cells are oxidase-negative,
catalase-positive and positive in the Methyl-Red test. Cells use citrate, are negative in the
Voges-Proskauer test and do not decarboxylate lysine [73].
In a study of the enteric bacteria present in the feces of Australian mammals, Gordon and FitzGibbon [74]
reported the isolation of C. amalonaticus, C. freundii and C. koseri (C. diversus). Citrobacter species
can be isolated from different clinical sites. In particular, C. freundii is an intestinal inhabitant of
humans that may sometimes have—or acquire—the ability to produce an enterotoxin and thus become
an intestinal pathogen. Citrobacter is reported to occur in environments such as water, sewage, soil
and food [75,76].
7.3.9. Klebsiella and Raoultella
Klebsiella and Raoultella are Enterobacteriaceae, oxidase-negative catalase-positive non-motile
straight rods, surrounded by a capsule. Cells decarboxylate lysine, but are ornithine and arginine
dihydrolase negative. Cells grow on KCN, do not produce H2S and ferment most carbohydrates [73].
In humans, K. pneumoniae is present as commensal in the nasopharynx and in the intestinal tract.
Klebsiella spp. can cause human diseases, ranging from asymptomatic colonization of the intestinal,
urinary, or respiratory tract to fatal septicemia. Klebsiella are mostly considered nosocomial pathogens.
K. pneumoniae and Enterobacter aerogenes (K. mobilis) are most frequently involved, although K.
oxytoca and R. planticola, and rarely R. terrigena, can be found. In the hospital, the principal reservoir
of K. pneumoniae is the gastrointestinal tract of patients. The principal vectors are the hands of
personnel [77,78]. In a study of the enteric bacteria present in the feces of Australian mammals, Gordon and
FitzGibbon [74] reported the isolation of K. pneumoniae and K. oxytoca.
Klebsiellae are ubitiquous in the environment. They have been found in a variety of environmental
situations, such as soil, vegetation, or water, and they influence many biochemical and geochemical
processes. They have been recovered from aquatic environments receiving industrial wastewaters,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3679

plant products, fresh vegetables, food with a high content of sugars and acids, frozen orange juice
concentrate, sugarcane wastes, living trees, and plants and plant byproducts. They are commonly
associated with wood, sawdust, and waters receiving industrial effluents from pulp and paper mills and
textile finishing plants (see below). Klebsiella have been isolated from the root surfaces of various
plants. K. pneumoniae, K. oxytoca, and R. planticola are all capable of fixing dinitrogen [77,78].
7.3.10. Enterobacter
Enterobacter a member of Enterobacteriaceae, are motile straight rods. Cells are positive in the
Voges-Proskauer test VP and in Simmons citrate agar. Cells do not decarboxylate lysine, but are
ornithine positive. Malonate is usually utilized and gelatin is slowly liquefied. Cells do not produce
H2S, deoxyribonuclease and lipase [73].
In a study of the enteric bacteria present in the feces of Australian mammals, Gordon and FitzGibbon [74]
reported the isolation of Enterobacter cloacae subsp. cloacae (E. cloacae), E. cancerogenus
(E. taylorae) and E. aerogenes (Klebsiella mobilis).
Before the widespread use of antibiotics, Enterobacter species were rarely found as pathogens, but
these organisms are now increasingly encountered, causing nosocomial infections such as urinary tract
infections and bacteremia. In addition, they occasionally cause community-acquired infections [79,80].
In the USA, the Surveillance and Control of Pathogens of Epidemiological Importance project
analyzed 24,179 nosocomial bloodstream infections, from 1995–2002. Enterobacter species were the
second most common gram-negative organism, behind Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both bacteria were
reported to each represent 4.7% of bloodstream infections in intensive care units. Enterobacter species
represented 3.1% of bloodstream infections in non-intensive care units. Of nearly 75,000
gram-negative organisms collected from intensive care units‘ patients in the USA, between 1993 and
2004, Enterobacter species comprised 13.5% of the isolates. Multidrug resistance increased over time,
especially in infections caused by E. cloacae [81].
In the USA, the National Healthcare Safety Network reported a study on healthcare-associated
infections between 2006 and 2007. They found Enterobacter species to be the eighth most common
cause of healthcare-associated infections (5% of all infections) and the fourth most common
gram-negative cause of these infections [82].
Enterobacter cloacae subsp. cloacae (E. cloacae) occurs in the intestinal tracts of humans and
animals, in hospital environments, the skin, in water, sewage, soil, meat. Nitrogen-fixing strains have
been isolated from the roots of rice plants. E. amnigenus has been mostly isolated from water, but
some strains were isolated from clinical specimens from the respiratory tract, wounds and feces.
E. asburiae strains were isolated from clinical specimens, mostly urine, respiratory tract, feces,
wounds, and blood [79,80].
7.4. Origin of the Use of Fecal Indicator Bacteria
Historically, the design and use of indicators of fecal pollution comes from the end of the
19th to beginning of the 20th century. In 1880, von Fritsch described Klebsiella pneumoniae and K.
pneumoniae subsp. rhinoscleromatis (Klebsiella rhinoscleromatis) as micro-organisms
characteristically found in human feces [83]. In 1885, Escherich described several microorganisms in



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3680

the feces of newborn and suckling babies. This included a motile, rod-shaped microorganism that
caused milk to clot, which was named ―Bacterium coli commune‖. He observed that within a few
weeks after birth, this bacterium became the dominant organism in the infant colon [6]. Also in 1885,
Percy and Grace Frankland started the first routine bacteriological examination of water in London,
using Robert Koch‘s solid gelatin media to count bacteria [83]. In 1891, Percy and Grace Frankland
came up with the concept that organisms characteristic of sewage must be identified to provide
evidence of potentially dangerous pollution [83]. In 1892, Schardinger proposed that since ―Bacterium
coli‖ was a characteristic component of the fecal flora, its presence in water could be taken as an
indication of the presence of fecal pollution and therefore of the potential presence of enteric
pathogens [6]. Soon after the description of ―Bacterium coli‖, other bacteria were isolated from stools
and water—Klebsiella in 1882 and Enterobacter in 1890 [6]. By 1893, the ―Wurtz method‖ of
enumerating ―Bacterium coli‖, by direct plating water samples on litmus lactose agar, was being used
by sanitary bacteriologists. This was based on the concept of acid and gas production (detected by the
Durham tube) from lactose as a diagnostic feature [6]. In 1905, MacConkey described his now famous
MacConkey‘s broth, which was diagnostic for lactose-fermenting bacteria tolerant of bile salts.
Coliforms were already considered to be a heterogeneous group of organisms, many of which were not
of fecal origin. The origins of the critical observation that ―Bacterium coli‖ was largely fecal in origin
while other coliforms were not, could be claimed by Winslow and Walker in 1907 [83].
Various classification schemes for coliforms have emerged. The earliest were those of MacConkey
in 1909, which recognized 128 different coliform types, while Bergey and Deehan in 1908, identified
256. By the early 1920s, differentiation of coliforms had come to a series of correlations that suggested
that indole production, gelatin liquefaction, sucrose fermentation and the Voges–Proskauer reaction
were among the more important tests for determining fecal contamination. These developments
culminated in the IMViC (Indole, Methyl Red, Voges–Proskauer and Citrate) tests for the
differentiation of so-called fecal coliforms, soil coliforms and intermediates [83].
7.5. Fecal Indicator Bacteria
7.5.1. Coliforms
Total coliforms are Gram-negative, oxidase-negative, non-sporeforming rods, that ferment lactose
with gas production at 35–37 °C, after 48h, in a medium with bile salts and detergents [1,4,6,57,84].
When the test of coliforms is carried out with environmental waters, several species of the four
Enterobacteriaceae genera Escherichia, Klebsiella, Enterobacter and Citrobacter give positive results
and therefore are coliforms according to this definition. However, the environmental significance of
these four genera is very disparate as discussed in the present text. Therefore, total coliform counts are
not necessarily a measure of fecal pollution and indeed can have no relation with this cause [1,4,6,84].
Fecal coliforms (or thermotolerant coliforms) are traditionally defined as coliforms that ferment
lactose at 44.5 °C in a medium with bile salts [1,4,57,84]. The range of species detected by the
experimental procedure is much lower than that of total coliforms. With environmental polluted waters,
only E. coli, and K. oxytoca and K. pneumoniae gave positive results in the test [85].
Traditional tests for total and fecal coliforms are carried out either by the multiple-tube
fermentation technique or by filtration through membrane. The multiple-tube fermentation technique is



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3681

used for medium or highly contaminated waters, and the filtration through membrane for low or very
low contaminated waters. Filtration through membrane is a very sensitive technique since can detect
one (culturable) cell in 500 or even 1,000 mL of water. However, both methods take several days to
complete and do not detect viable but non-culturable bacteria [3,57,86]. These limitations stimulate the
discovery of alternative methods, faster and, if possible, less prone to false negative results such as
those caused by the viable but non-culturable bacteria.
The detection of β-D-galactosidase activity (at 37 °C) is usually a good marker for total coliforms
in environmental waters, since most of these bacteria display this enzymatic activity [1,3,57,87-91].
Most Escherichia, Citrobacter, Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Raoultella strains have galactosidase.
Hafnia, Serratia and Yersinia also possess this enzymatic activity. Most Proteus, Salmonella and
Edwardsiella strains do not display β-galactosidase [92-95]. Ca. 10% of the coliform strains isolated
from the environment do not have an active formic hydrogenolyase (cleaves formate with the
formation of CO2) and therefore do not produce gas being undetected by the traditional techniques but
are detected by the assay of β-galactosidase activity [57,96,97].
β-galactosidase cleaves lactose in glucose and galactose, and can be detected by using colored or
fluorescent markers that change color after enzyme action, such as XGAL (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolβ-galactopyranoside)
and
ONPG
(O-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside)
or
MUGAL
(4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-galactopyranoside), respectively [57,96,97].
In environmental waters, the presence of Aeromonas or Vibrio cholerae can be a source of false
positives in the β-D-galactosidase assay, since these bacteria have galactosidase, but are not
coliforms [93,95,96,98]. Additionally, in particular environments, such as estuaries, β-galactosidase
activity can overestimate total coliform count due to UV-stimulated enzymatic activity in certain
bacteria such as E. coli [86].
The detection of β-D-glucuronidase activity (at 44.5 °C) is, generally, a good marker for fecal
coliforms in environmental polluted waters and very specific for E. coli [13,85,87-91,97,99-101]. In
Gram-negative bacteria, this enzymatic activity if found in most E. coli strains and in some Salmonella
and Shigella strains [92-95,97,102]. Aeromonas, Citrobacter, Enterobacter, non-coli Escherichia,
Hafnia, Klebsiella, Proteus, Serratia, Vibrio, Yersinia, and most Salmonella strains do not display
β-glucuronidase activity [93-95,101,102].
β-D-glucuronidase activity can be detected by using colored or fluorescent markers that change
color after enzyme action, such as XGLUC (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indoxyl-β-D-glucuronide), IBDG
(indoxil-β-glucuronide), and MUGLU (4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-glucuronide), respectively [57,97,100].
The presence of this enzyme in some strains of Bacteroides, Flavobacterium, Staphylococcus,
Streptococcus, in anaerobic corynebacteria and Clostridium, has also been reported [93,95-97,102].
β-D-glucuronidase activity in fecal bacteria other then E. coli (Bacteroides, bifidobacteria, clostridia,
enterococci and Lactobacillus) is very limited [61]. Although all these glucuronidase positive bacteria
could lead to false positive detections in the fecal coliform test, experimental results for environmental
polluted waters indicate a significant correlation between fecal coliform detection using conventional
techniques and the glucuronidase assay, suggesting that false positives are not significant [85,96].
The detection of total coliforms and fecal coliforms by enzymatic methods are much less time
consuming than traditional techniques. With fluorescent markers and the use of a spectrofluorimeter the
detection of coliforms can be performed in minutes [57,101]. However, in very low contaminated waters,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3682

enzymatic methods might not be able to detect coliform cells. Moreover, on-line monitoring of
glucuronidase activity is currently too insensitive to replace culture based detection of E. coli.
Nevertheless, on-line enzymatic methods can be a valuable complementary tool for high temporal
resolution monitoring. More research is needed in order to enhance sensitive and lower detection limits
of available on-line glucuronidase techniques.
The seminal work of Leclerc et al. [103] clarified the diversified roles that coliforms have in the
environment and the real meanings of the tests on total coliforms and fecal coliforms. It was shown
that Enterobacteriaceae encompass three groups of bacteria with very different roles in the
environment. Group I harbored only E. coli. Since this species usually do not survive for long periods
outside this environment (but see topic 10), it was considered a good and reliable indicator of fecal
pollution (both animal and human). Group II, the ―ubiquitary‖ group, encompassed several species of
Klebsiella (K. pneumoniae and K. oxytoca), Enterobacter (Enterobacter cloacae subsp. cloacae, E.
aerogenes) and Citrobacter (C. amalonaticus, C. koseri and C. freundii). These bacteria live in the
animal and human gut, but also in the environment, and are easily isolated from the soil, polluted water
and plants. Their presence in polluted waters does not necessarily indicate fecal pollution. Finally
Group III was composed of Raoultella planticola, R. terrigena, Enterobacter amnigenus and Kluyvera
intermedia (Enterobacter intermedius), Serratia fonticola, and the genera Budvicia, Buttiauxella,
Leclercia, Rahnella, Yersinia, and most species of Erwinia and Pantoea. These bacteria live in fresh
waters, plants and small animals. They grow at 4 °C, but not at 41 °C. They are not indicators of fecal
pollution, although can be detected in the total coliform test. Leclerc et al. concluded that: (1) in the
enterobacteria, E. coli is the only true and reliable indicator of fecal pollution in environmental waters;
(2) the traditional total coliform test should be abandoned, since it can detect bacteria that have no
connection with fecal pollution; (3) the detection of fecal coliforms must be carried out at 44.5 °C, and
positive results confirmed by identification to species levels in order to exclude false positives such as
K. pneumoniae.
7.5.2. Streptococci and Enterococci
Fecal streptococci also belong to the traditional indicators of fecal pollution. Fecal streptococci are
Gram-positive, catalase-negative, non-sporeforming cocci that grow at 35 °C in a medium containing
bile salts and sodium azide. Cells hydrolyze esculin [1,4,57]. Azide is a strong inhibitor of the
respiratory chain. Since streptococci are one of the very few bacteria that have no respiratory chain,
the test is very specific for this group, and false positives are rarely found [104,105].
Fecal enterococci (E. faecalis, E. faecium, E. avium and E. gallinarum) are fecal streptococci that
grow in the presence of 6.5% NaCl at 45 °C. Selective media use these particular characteristics in
order to separate enterococci from the other streptococci [104,105].
Several studies [104,106] have reported on the microbiological composition of human and animal
(cattle, chicken, deer, dog, fowl, goose, and swine) feces. E. faecalis and E. faecium were present in
human and animal feces. However, whereas human feces almost have only these two enterococci, in
the animals others species co-occur, like E. avium, E. cecorum, E. durans, E. gallinarum and E. hirae.
It was concluded that in urban areas where contamination with dog and chicken feces is not likely, the
best marker for human fecal pollution was E. faecalis.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3683

The intestinal enterococci group has been used as an index of fecal pollution. In human feces, the
numbers of intestinal enterococci are generally about an order of magnitude lower than those of E. coli
(Table 6). Most species do not grow in environmental waters. In this milieu, fecal enterococci are able
to survive longer, are more resistant to drying and chlorination, than E. coli [1,84].
Table 7. Bacteria in the feces of farm and domestic warm-blooded animals a.
Animal
Chicken
Duck
Horse
Pig
Sheep
Turkey
Cat
Dog

Fecal coliforms

Log10 cells/g wet weight feces
Fecal streptococci
Clostridium perfringens

5.4
7.5
4.1
6.5
7.2
5.5
6.9
7.1

6.1
7.7
6.8
7.9
7.6
6.4
7.4
9.0
a

2.3
<0
3.6
5.3
7.4
8.4

Adapted from [83].

However, caution should be taken with interpreting the results obtained by the enterococci
procedure in water analysis. Enterococci and other group D-streptococci are present in many foods,
especially those of animal origin. The isolation of E. faecalis and E. faecium was used to indicate fecal
contamination of food. However, enterococci are now also considered as normal parts of the food
microflora and not only as indicators for poor hygiene [104]. In addition, agricultural soils and crops
with added with manure also harbor enterococci [105].
7.5.3. The use of ratios between indicator counts
The ratio of counts of fecal coliforms to fecal streptococci has been proposed as a means to
differentiating between contamination from human and animal sources. Ratios greater than 4 have
been suggested to indicate a human source whereas ratios less than 0.7 suggest an animal source. This
results from the fact that streptococcal concentrations in human feces are generally less than coliforms
(Table 6). In contrast, in animal feces fecal streptococci generally outnumber fecal coliforms (Table 7).
In urban sewage, fecal streptococci tend to be present in concentrations 10–100 times less than fecal
coliforms [65].
Geldreich [107] summarized the information available on the fecal coliforms to fecal streptococci
ratios in the feces of warmblooded animals, and reported the following values: human feces, 4.3; cattle,
sheep, and poultry, from 0.104 to 0.421; and wild animals (including rabbits, field mice, chipmunks,
and birds), 0.0008 to 0.043. Fecal coliforms to fecal streptococci ratios for the feces of wild animals
appear to be at least 10-fold lower than those of domestic livestock.
Doran and Linn [108] reported a study of the runoff from a cow-calf pasture in eastern Nebraska
(USA), monitored during a three-year period. It was concluded that the fecal coliforms to fecal
streptococci ratio in pasture runoff was useful in identifying the relative contributions of cattle and
wildlife and in evaluating the effects of cattle management and distribution on runoff water quality.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3684

Ratios below 0.05 were indicative of wildlife sources and ratios above 0.1 were characteristic of
grazing cattle. Fecal coliforms to fecal streptococci ratios of diluted cattle waste in excess of 1 were
interpreted as the result of differential aftergrowth and die-off between fecal coliforms and fecal
streptococci. Ratios between 0.7 and 4.0 may indicate situations where cattle are localized close to
sampling or outflow points.
However, the interpretation of this ratio should be cautious. It has been observed a shift in the ratio
with time and distance from the fecal pollution source. This resulted from the fact that both in surface
and groundwaters, fecal streptococci are more persistent than fecal coliforms. Therefore increasing the
distance from the pollution point and with passing time, the ratio tends to decrease without a change in
the nature of the pollution source [65]. For these reasons, this ratio has been considered by some
authors as too unreliable to be useful in characterizing pollution sources [65,84].
The ratio of fecal enterococci to fecal streptococci differs among vertebrate species. Humans have a
predominance of enterococci, whereas animals contain appreciable amounts of streptococci. However,
since enterococci are also present in animals and are more persistent in the environment than other
fecal streptococci, the identification of the enterococci and streptococci species present in polluted
waters, and the concomitant calculation of this ratio is generally considered unreliable as an indicator
of the source of fecal pollution [65].
7.5.4. Limitations of coliform and enterococcus counts as indicator of fecal pollution
An extreme case of uselessness of the determination of total and fecal coliforms and enterococci in
the assessment of fecal pollution has been demonstrated by several authors studying the microbiology
of pulp and paper mill effluents.
Caplenas and Kanarek [109] reported a study of pulp and paper mills located in Wisconsin (USA).
Fresh water supplies, re-cycled water within mills, treated effluent wastewater and waters receiving
effluent wastes downstream, were assessed for the presence of fecal coliforms and Klebsiella.
Wastewaters prior to treatment contained fecal coliforms and Klebsiella. Up to 84% of the fecal
coliforms (detected by the standard test procedure) were indeed Klebsiella. In treated effluent
wastewaters this value reached 90%. Treatment of the wastewater lowered the concentration of ―true‖
fecal bacterial contamination, but since Klebsiella grew rapidly in the wastewaters, fecal coliform
counts were high, although no true fecal contamination was involved. The source of Klebsiella was
traced to the early pulping stages in the mills. Klebsiella maintains a wood, bark or soil reservoir. It
was concluded that: (1) Klebsiella are ubiquitous in the pulp and paper mill industry processing stages;
(2) the standard procedure for fecal coliform estimation is useless to assess the microbiological
quality of the effluents of these industries; (3) The assay of E. coli should replace the fecal coliform
detection procedure.
Gauthier et al. [110] and Gauthier and Archibald [58] reported two studies of seven pulp and paper
mills in Ontario and Quebec, Canada. Total and fecal coliforms and enterococci were detected in
nearly all the biotreatment, biosolids (sludges), and in-mill water system samples. In the mill samples,
the majority of the fecal coliforms (detected by the standard test procedure) were K. pneumoniae,
Raoultella terrigena and Raoultella planticola, with E. coli in minority. E. faecalis and E. faecium
were detected in relatively large numbers in most samples from all of the seven mills examined. Other



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3685

coliforms such as Enterobacter spp. and Citrobacter freundii were occasionally recovered from total
and fecal coliform tubes. Biofilms established in the piping, tanks, and machinery where thermal and
pH conditions permit were the most likely source of these bacteria. Analyses using two independent
Salmonella detection/enumeration methods showed no detectable Salmonella cells in the sludges and
final effluents of the five mills tested. It was concluded that for these particular systems, the
determination of total and fecal coliforms and enterococci is useless and have no relationship with real
fecal pollution. These studies also demonstrated the importance of checking the identities of bacteria
causing the positive results in the tests. Both Escherichia and Klebsiella can give positive results in the
fecal coliform test, but their ecological meaning is opposite.
Another important case of failure of the use of coliforms to detect fecal pollution was the 1993
Cryptosporidium outbreak in Milwaukee (USA).
Cryptosporidium parvum, a protozoan parasite that causes gastrointestinal illness, is transmitted by
ingestion of oocysts excreted in human or animal feces. Typical modes of transmission include person
to person, animal to person, by exposure to contaminated food or water [111,112].
From 1990 to 2000, at least 10 cryptosporidiosis outbreaks associated with contaminated drinking
water were reported in the USA. In 1993, an estimated 403,000 residents of the greater Milwaukee area
(Wisconsin, population, ca. 1.61 million) became ill when an ineffective filtration process led to the
inadequate removal of Cryptosporidium oocysts in one of two municipal water-treatment plants [111,112].
It was the largest waterborne disease outbreak in documented USA history. Over the span of
approximately two weeks, people became ill with stomach cramps, fever, diarrhea and dehydration
caused by the pathogen. More than half the people who received residential drinking water from the
southern water-treatment plant became ill, which was twice the rate of illness among people whose
residential drinking water came mainly from the northern water-treatment plant. Over 54 deaths were
attributed to this outbreak, mostly among the elderly and immunocompromised people, such as AIDS
patients [111,112].
Standard microbiological water analysis was ineffective in detecting this parasite. Indeed,
throughout the period from February to April, samples of treated water from both plants were negative
for coliforms. The origin of the contamination was determined as water from Lake Michigan. No
specific source of the Cryptosporidium was ever identified but runoff from abnormally heavy spring
rains most likely carried the parasite to the lake [111,112].
7.5.5. Clostridium perfringens
Sulphite-reducing clostridia, namely Clostridium perfringens, are spore-forming Gram-positive,
non-motile, anaerobic, sulfite-reducing rods. C. perfringens is present in higher numbers in the feces
of some animals, such as dogs, than in the feces of humans and less often in the feces of many other
warm-blooded animals. The numbers excreted in feces are normally substantially lower than those of
E. coli.
Clostridium spores are exceptionally resistant to unfavorable conditions in water environments,
including UV irradiation, temperature and pH extremes, and disinfection processes, such as
chlorination. Although clostridia probably do not growth in surface waters, the high resistance of their
spores makes their presence ubiquitous in environmental waters [1,4,84,113].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3686

The presence of chlorine in water rapidly inactivates indicator bacteria such as E. coli and coliforms,
but it leaves the most resistant pathogens almost unaffected for several hours. This creates a false sense
of security by providing negative coliform and negative E. coli results to authorities responsible for
water testing. Giardia cysts, Crystosporidium oocysts, and human enteric viruses all have higher
resistance to disinfectants and constitute a major public health risk if distribution system integrity is
breached. C. perfringens spores are less affected by the residual concentrations of chlorine. Testing for
the spores of this bacterium can probably provide an added margin of safety in the evaluation of
treatment [114].
7.5.6. Correlations between parameters used to assess fecal pollution
In environmental waters, several studies have reported significant correlations between indicators of
fecal pollution and between indicators and pathogenic gastrointestinal bacteria.
Charriere et al. [115] reported a study of deep aquifer waters (raw waters and piped chlorinated
waters) in Normandy, France. In heavily contaminated raw waters and in slightly contaminated treated
waters, fecal coliforms and enterococci were correlated.
Martins et al. [116] reported a study of 60 public outdoor swimming pools in Sao Paulo city, Brazil.
Total coliforms, fecal coliforms and fecal streptococci levels increased with number of bathers and
water temperature, and decreased with chlorine levels. All these indicators were significantly
correlated with each other.
Ferguson et al. [117] reported a study carried out in Georges River, in the Sydney region, Australia. In
the water column, concentrations of fecal coliforms, fecal streptococci, C. perfringens spores were all
positively correlated with each other. Isolation of Salmonella spp. were most frequent during rainfall
and sewage overflow events. In the water column, 55% of samples contained Salmonella when fecal
coliform densities exceeded 2,000 CFU/100 mL.
Medema et al. [118] reported a study of seven different fresh water sites normally used for triathlon
competitions. Sites were small rivers, channels, lakes and harbors, and were influenced by sewage
effluents and agricultural run-off. When data from all triathlons were pooled, geometric mean densities
of fecal coliforms and E. coli, of E. coli and fecal enterococci and of fecal coliforms and fecal
enterococci, were significantly correlated.
Polo et al. [119] reported a study of water samples obtained from 213 beaches, eight rivers and 14
freshwaters in north-eastern Spain. In freshwaters and heavily contaminated seawaters, Salmonella and
fecal coliforms were correlated, while in less contaminated seawaters, the highest correlation was with
between Salmonella and fecal streptococci.
Byamukama et al. [99] reported a study of the microbiology of Nakivubo channel, Uganda. This
channel receives raw sewage from slums, industrial effluents, and discharges from a sewage treatment
plant and from a complex of slaughterhouses. Water from eight sampling sites was assessed for the
presence of total and fecal coliforms, E. coli and sulphite-reducing clostridia. All microbiological
parameters were significantly correlated.
Noble et al. [120] reported a comparative determination of total coliforms, fecal coliforms and
enterococci in 108 sites along the southern California coastline, USA. Results by traditional and
enzymatic methods and from all three parameters were correlated.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3687

Harwood et al. [121] reported a study on indicator and pathogenic microorganisms carried out in
six wastewater reclamation facilities in the USA. Data from disinfected effluent (reclaimed water)
samples were analyzed separately (by facility) and as a pooled data set (all facilities). Significant
correlations between indicator organism concentrations were observed in the pooled data sets, namely
for total and fecal coliforms.
Cabral and Marques [85] reported a microbiological study of a polluted river (Febros) in the Great
Oporto area, northwest Portugal. Total and fecal coliforms, fecal streptococci and enterococci were all
significantly correlated with each other.
Touron et al. [122] reported a study carried out in the Seine estuary, France. Water was sampled at
nine stations (along an upstream/downstream transect of 156 km), during nine years, for fecal
coliforms, E. coli, enterococci and Clostridium perfringens spores. At the upstream part of the estuary
(at Poses), Salmonella and fecal coliforms, and E. coli and enterococci counts were correlated. At the
mouth of the estuary (at Honfleur), significant correlation was found for Salmonella and enterococci
counts. No significant correlation between concentrations of any combination of indicator organism
and pathogen was observed.
Wilkes et al. [59] reported a comparative study on the presence and concentration of several
pathogenic and indicator bacteria in the surface water of a Canadian river. Surface water was collected
within the South Nation River basin in eastern Ontario, from the river proper, and from several lower
stream order tributaries. Using data aggregated during the entire multi-year study, significant
correlations were found among all indicator bacteria - total and fecal coliforms, E. coli, Enterococcus,
and C. perfringens.
However, in others studies no correlation was found between the different fecal indicator bacteria.
Garrido-Pérez et al. [123] reported a study of the bathing seawater quality in 18 Spanish beaches near
the Strait of Gibraltar. Sample locations were selected as a single point located in the area of highest
bather density of each beach. No significant correlation was found between fecal coliforms and
Clostridium perfringens counts in the bathing seawater.
8. Fecal Indicator Chemical Compounds
Several chemical substances have been used as markers of fecal pollution in environmental waters.
Caffeine is present in several beverages and in many pharmaceutical products. It is excreted in the
urine of individuals who have ingested the substance. The main source of caffeine in domestic
wastewaters is excretion following consumption of coffee, tea, soft drinks, or medication. Levels of
caffeine in domestic wastewater have been measured to be between 20 and 300 µg/L. Levels in
receiving waters are much lower due to significant dilution. Due to its high solubility, low
octanol-water partition coefficient, insignificant volatility and clear anthropogenic origin, the presence
of caffeine in environmental waters can be a good marker for human fecal pollution [124-129].
However, relationships between fecal indicator bacteria and caffeine are variable. Wu et al. [129]
reported a study carried out in the Rochor Canal and Marina Bay, Singapore. In Rochor Canal, the
highest concentration of caffeine (1.35 ng/mL) was found at downstream, and the lowest (0.68 and
0.37 ng/mL) were determined at middle and upstream points. At Marina Bay, the concentration of
caffeine was in the range of 0.41–0.96 ng/mL. Fecal coliform concentrations were very high,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3688

exceeding 5,000 CFU/100 mL. Caffeine and fecal coliform concentrations were significantly
correlated in Rochor Canal samples, but no significant correlation was observed in Martina Bay
water samples.
The use of caffeine as marker of fecal pollution has additional important limitations. Caffeine is
often present in the urban environment from numerous plant species debris as well as from human
―dumping‖ of coffee wastes. In addition, the current analytical methods used are relatively complex
and expensive [124].
Coprostanol (5β-cholestan-3β-ol) is a fecal stanol that is formed by indigenous bacteria present in
the gut of humans and higher animals, during catabolism of cholesterol. It is the main stanol present in
human feces (24 to 89% of total steroids) and in domestic wastewater. Based on these facts, it has been
proposed as a chemical indicator of human fecal pollution. Feces from pigs and cats also contain
coprostanol, but at much lower levels. Additional fecal stanols, such as 24-ethylcoprostanol, were
found to be predominant in herbivores, such as cows, horses, and sheep, suggesting potential use of
this chemical as an indicator of fecal pollution from these sources. Reported half-lives of
coprostanol in aerobic conditions are generally lower than 10 days at 20 °C. Thus, the presence of
coprostanol in an aerobic environment can be considered an indication of recent fecal input to the
waters. [124,128,130].
Isobe et al. [130] reported a study carried out in the Mekong Delta (Vietnam) and in the Tokyo
metropolitan area. During the wet season in the Mekong Delta, higher bacterial densities were
observed in rivers, probably due to the higher bacterial inputs from soil particles with runoff. In Tokyo,
higher bacterial densities were usually observed during summer, followed by those in the typhoon
aftermath and winter. Significant correlations between the concentrations of E. coli and coprostanol
(log scale) were found in all surveys. It was concluded that the determination of coprostanol can
improve standard microbiological assays of fecal pollution.
Reports from several regions throughout the world indicate variable quantitative relationships
between fecal coliform densities and coprostanol concentrations. In the Derwent Estuary and Sydney
region (Australia), coprostanol concentration of 400 ng/L corresponded to 1,000 CFU of fecal
coliforms/100 mL. In the Mekong Delta, during the wet season, this coliform density corresponded to
30 ng coprostanol/L, and in the dry seasons, 100 ng/L. In Tokyo metropolitan area, these values were
30 ng coprostanol/L, in summer, and 100 ng coprostanol/L, in a typhoon aftermath. These differences
were interpreted as a result of differences in water temperature and soil particle concentration [130].
Fecal sterol analysis, although expensive and complex, has resolved problems of source attribution
in urban and rural environments not possible with use of traditional fecal indicator bacteria [124].
These chemical indicators are especially useful in environments which allow survival and growth of
fecal bacteria. For instance, in tropical regions, characterized by high temperatures and frequent
rainstorms that facilitate erosion of soils, fecal bacteria can proliferate in environmental waters
reaching densities that are not representative of real sewage inputs in the environment [130].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3689

9. Sources of Fecal Bacterial Pollution of Environmental Waters
9.1. Sources of Surface and Groundwater Contamination
Determinations carried out in the sewage systems of urbanized areas have confirmed the presence
of high numbers of intestinal bacteria. Treatment of sewage reduces the concentration of these bacteria
by 1–2 logs, but effluent still contains high levels of intestinal bacteria (Table 8). Effluents from
sewage treatment plants can be a source of contamination of surface waters with fecal bacteria.
Table 8. Typical concentrations of selected bacteria in raw and treated domestic
wastewater a.
Bacterial group

Raw sewage (cells/ml)
–1

10 – 10
104 – 106
103 – 105
103 – 104
102 – 103

Salmonella
Total coliforms
Fecal coliforms
Enterococci
Clostridium perfringens
a

1

Treated effluent (cells/ml)
10–1 – 101
103 – 105
102 – 104
101 – 103
101 – 102

Adapted from Medema et al. [131].

Septic tanks, cesspools, latrines and other on-site systems are widely used for wastewater storage
and treatment. The water percolating from these facilities contains bacteria that may contaminate
groundwater supplies.
Many farmers use cellars, tanks or landfills to store manure. Water leaching from these storage sites
may also contaminate groundwater, especially during periods of rainfall. The application of animal
manure to agricultural lands as fertilizer is common practice throughout the world. Bacteria present in
the manure may leach into the groundwater.
The potential for bacteria present in human and animal wastes to contaminate water in nearby wells
needs special attention [131]. An important source of contamination of surface and ground waters is
runoff water from agricultural and pasture lands, and urban areas.
Fecal bacteria enter surface water by direct deposit of feces and by overland runoff. The movement
of animal wastes into surface waters can be a major factor contributing to the pollution of available
water in many regions. Over one-third of the land area of USA is used for grazing livestock and
receives 50% of all livestock wastes.
In a study reported by Doran and Linn [108], runoff from a cow-calf pasture in eastern Nebraska
was monitored during a three-year period. Rainfall runoff from the grazed area contained 5 to 10 times
more fecal coliforms than runoff from the fenced, ungrazed area. However, fecal streptococci counts
were higher in runoff from the ungrazed area and reflected the contributions from wildlife.
Urban and suburban areas are dominated by impervious cover. During storms, rainwater flows
across these impervious surfaces, mobilizing contaminants. The pollutants carried in runoff originate
from a variety of urban and suburban nonpoint sources. Contaminants commonly found in stormwater
runoff include fecal and pathogenic bacteria. Stormwater transports pollutants to water bodies such as
lakes and streams [132].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3690

Enterococci and E. coli can be found in high numbers in most storm drains and creeks. In Southern
California (USA), Ferguson et al. [133] found high levels of enterococci (Enterococcus faecalis,
Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus hirae, Enterococcus casseliflavus and Enterococcus mundtii) in
intertidal sediments in a seasonal river, and near a storm drain outlet.
9.2. Survival in Surface Water
Most intestinal bacteria that contaminate environmental waters are not able to survive and multiply
in this environment. Survival rates vary widely among fecal bacteria introduced in environmental
waters. Pathogenic enteric bacteria and E. coli display low survival rates (Table 9).
The ability of fecal bacteria to survive in environmental waters generally increases as the
temperature decreases. Others factors that influence survival include dissolved organic carbon
concentration, sunlight intensity and the ability to enter the viable but non-culturable state [131].
In a comparative study on the survival of 10 different coliform species (E. coli, Citrobacter freundii,
Citrobacter youngae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, K. oxytoca, Enterobacter amnigenus, Enterobacter
cloacae subsp. cloacae, and Pantoea agglomerans (Enterobacter agglomerans)) inoculated in
sterilized river water with different concentrations of dissolved organic carbon,
Boualam et al. [134] found that only C. freundii, K. pneumoniae and E. cloacae subsp. cloacae
remained cultivable after 96 hours of incubation. In a posterior study, using the same bacteria and
medium, Boualam et al. [135] found that after 28 days, only C. freundii and E. cloacae subsp.
cloacae survived.
Table 9. Reduction times for fecal bacteria in surface waters a.
Bacterial group

Time for 50% reduction in concentration (days)

Total coliforms
E. coli
Enterococci
Clostridium perfringens
Salmonella
Shigella

0.9
1.5–3
0.9–4
60 – > 300
0.1–0.67
1
a

Adapted from Medema et al. [131].

Baudišová [136] reported a comparative study on the survival of total coliforms, fecal coliforms and
E. coli, in sterile and non-sterile river water. In sterile water, all bacteria survived for many months.
However, in non-sterile conditions (closer to true environmental conditions), the elimination rate of all
bacteria was considerably faster. Total coliforms survived the longest and E. coli the shortest.
9.3. Survival in Groundwater
Survival of bacteria in groundwater is influenced by several factors, namely the survival in soil,
since in order to reach the groundwater bacteria have to percolate through the soil. Generally, survival
in soil (and concomitantly in groundwater) is enhanced by low temperatures, high soil humidity,
neutral or alkaline soil pH and the presence of organic carbon [131].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3691

Table 10. Disappearance rates of fecal bacteria in groundwaters a.
Bacterial group
E. coli
Fecal streptococci
Clostridium bifermentans spores
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium
a

Disappearance rate (per day)
0.063–0.36
0.03–0.24
0.00
0.13–0.22

Adapted from Medema et al. [131].

10. Which Indicators of Fecal Pollution Should Be Used?
Several fecal indicator bacteria in environmental waters are in current use. From these stand out
fecal coliforms, E. coli and enterococci [1,6,137]. In environmental waters, most fecal coliform strains
are E. coli.
In particular situations, the presence of E. coli is definitively not associated with fecal pollution.
These situations were firstly detected in some African countries, namely Nigeria, Ivory Coast and New
Guinea (although not in others, such as Uganda) [42,99].
Recent studies carried out in temperate zones indicated that E. coli can persist in secondary,
nonhost habitats, outside the hot tropical areas, and become naturalized in these habitats.
Byappanahalli et al. [138] reported that E. coli could be isolated from coastal temperate forest soils in
Indiana (USA). The aquatic alga Cladophora glomerata (L.) from several Lake Michigan beaches was
shown to harbor high densities of E. coli [139].
Ishii et al. [140] reported a study on the survival of E. coli in temperate riverine soils of northern
Minnesota (USA). Viable E. coli populations were repeatedly isolated from northern temperate soils in
three Lake Superior watersheds. Seasonal variation in the population density of soilborne E. coli was
observed; the greatest cell densities were found in the summer to fall, and the lowest numbers,
occurred during the winter to spring months. Horizontal, fluorophore-enhanced repetitive extragenic
palindromic PCR (HFERP) DNA fingerprint analyses indicated that identical soilborne E. coli
genotypes, overwintered in frozen soil and were present over time, and that these strains were different
from E. coli strains obtained from wildlife commonly found in the studied habitats or river water.
Soilborne E. coli strains had HFERP DNA fingerprints that were unique to specific soils and locations.
In laboratory studies, naturalized E. coli strains had the ability to grow and replicate to high cell
densities, in nonsterile soils when incubated at 30 or 37 °C and survived longer than 1 month when soil
temperatures were lower than 25 °C. It was concluded that these E. coli strains became naturalized,
autochthonous members of the soil microbial community.
In a latter paper, Ksoll et al. [141] studied epilithic periphyton communities at three sites on the
Minnesota shoreline of Lake Superior (USA). Fecal coliform densities increased up to 4 orders of
magnitude in early summer, and decreased during autumn. HFERP DNA fingerprint analyses indicated
that waterfowl (geese, terns, and gulls) were the major primary source of periphyton E. coli strains that
could be identified. Periphyton and sewage effluent were also major potential sources. Several
periphyton E. coli isolates were genotypically identical, repeatedly isolated over time. Inoculated
E. coli rapidly colonized natural periphyton in laboratory microcosms and persisted for several weeks,



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3692

and some cells were released to the overlying water. It was concluded that E. coli had became a
naturalized member of the bacterial periphyton communities.
The presence, persistence, and possible naturalization of E. coli in these habitats can confound the
use of fecal coliforms as a reliable indicator of recent fecal contamination of environmental waters.
Future studies should consider other nonhost habitats as potential sources of fecal coliform bacteria in
aquatic environments.
Considering these limitations, it appears to be advisable, in order to check the microbiological
quality of drinking water, to complement the determination of Escherichia coli with the assay of
enterococci. This rationale that has been followed, for many years, in the making of the drinking-water
legislation in the European Union.
However, for many developing countries, where limited financial resources are the norm and reality,
the routine determination of these two parameters can be difficult to implement. In these circumstances,
it appears common sense that is better to determine a (good) parameter, such as Escherichia coli, than
have no analysis done.
In this context, USA legislation emerges as a pragmatic approach to the problem. According to the
American legislation, total coliforms are the routine parameter to be determined. Only when these
determinations are repeatedly positive, it is mandatory to assess fecal coliforms [142,143]. Although total
coliforms are not necessarily fecal bacteria, the rationale behind this system is correct, since: (1) a
positive test in fecal coliforms (which is our target) is necessarily positive in the total coliform
procedure; (2) the inverse is not necessarily true; (3) total coliforms are easily and cheaply assayed
in waters.
As an alternative to the determination of both E. coli and enterococci, the assay of ammonia in
environmental waters can be useful and complement the determination of fecal coliforms.
Ammonia is one of the key molecules in the nitrogen cycle. The presence of ammonia in surface
waters can be due to direct contamination by agricultural fertilizers, and/or to microbial degradation of
proteins, nucleic acids and urea, implying therefore the presence of a considerable concentration of
organic matter in the water. Ammonia is rapidly oxidized in the environment and is typically found in
natural waters at concentrations less than 0.1 mg/L. Concentrations significantly above this indicate
gross contamination by fresh sanitary waste, where ammonia levels are typically very high (tens or
hundreds of mg/L) [84].
Espigares et al. [144] reported a comparative study of chemical and microbiological indicators
(total and fecal coliforms, fecal streptococci and sulphite-reducing clostridia) in a stretch of the
Guadalquivir River (Spain) and its affluents. Total coliforms were correlated with fecal coliforms, but
were not correlated with fecal streptococci and clostridia. Fecal coliforms were correlated with the
other indicators. Fecal streptococci and sulphite-reducing clostridia were correlated with the other
indicators except for total coliforms. All these microbiological indicators were correlated with dissolved
oxygen (negatively), dissolved organic carbon and ammonia (positively). Cabral and Marques [85] in a
study of a polluted river (Febros) in the Great Oporto area (northwest Portugal) found that ammonia
was significantly correlated with all the microbiological assayed parameters—total and fecal coliforms,
fecal streptococci and enterococci. These correlations are most probably due to the
carry-over of organic matter in wastewaters, and to a high microbial ammonification activity [85].



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3693

Simple and rapid in-field tests and automated and continuous systems are available for the assay of
ammonia in environmental waters. More studies are needed in order to confirm the use of ammonia as
a reliable parameter in a preliminary screening for emergency fecal pollution outbreaks.
11. Conclusions
(1) Safe drinking water for all is one of the major challenges of the 21st century.
(2) Microbiological control of drinking water should be the norm everywhere.
(3) Routine basic microbiological analysis of drinking water should be carried out by assaying the
presence of Escherichia coli by the culture methods. On-line monitoring of glucuronidase
activity is currently too insensitive to replace culture based detection of E. coli but is a valuable
complementary tool for high temporal resolution monitoring. Whenever financial resources are
available, coliform determinations should be complemented with the quantification of
enterococci.
(4) More studies are needed in order to check if ammonia is reliable for a preliminary screening for
emergency fecal pollution outbreaks.
(5) Financial resources should be devoted to a better understanding of the ecology and behavior of
human and animal fecal bacteria in environmental waters.
References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

WHO (World Health Organization). Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality, Incorporating 1st
and 2nd Addenda, Volume 1, Recommendations, 3rd ed.; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
Fenwick, A. Waterborne Diseases—Could they be Consigned to History? Science 2006, 313,
1077–1081.
George, I.; Crop, P.; Servais, P. Use of β-D-Galactosidase and β-D-Glucuronidase Activities for
Quantitative Detection of Total and Faecal Coliforms in Wastewater. Can. J. Microbiol. 2001, 47,
670–675.
Grabow, W.O.K. Waterborne Diseases: Update on Water Quality Assessment and Control.
Water SA 1996, 22, 193–202.
Seas, C.; Alarcon, M.; Aragon, J.C.; Beneit, S.; Quiñonez, M.; Guerra, H.; Gotuzzo, E.
Surveillance of Bacterial Pathogens Associated with Acute Diarrhea in Lima, Peru. Int. J. Infect.
Dis. 2000, 4, 96–99.
Medema, G.J.; Payment, P.; Dufour, A.; Robertson, W.; Waite, M.; Hunter, P.; Kirby, R.;
Anderson, Y. Safe drinking water: an ongoing challenge. In Assessing Microbial Safety of
Drinking Water. Improving Approaches and Method; WHO & OECD, IWA Publishing: London,
UK, 2003; pp. 11–45.
Farmer, J.J.; Hickam-Brenner, F.W. The Genus Vibrio and Phtotobacterium. In The Prokaryotes:
An Evolving Electronic Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14,
3th ed.; Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New-York, NY, USA,
2003.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

3694

Farmer, J.J.; Janda, J.M.; Brenner, F.W.; Cameron, D.N.; Birkhead, K.M. Genus Vibrio. In
Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, 2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T.,
Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005; Volume 2, Part B, pp. 494–546.
DSMZ (Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH). Bacterial
Nomenclature Up-to-Date (Approved Lists; Validation Lists); DSMZ: Braunschweig, Germany,
2010; List 05/2010.
Sack, D.A.; Sack, R.B.; Nair, G.B.; Siddique, A.K. Cholera. Lancet 2004, 363, 223–233.
Todar, K. Vibrio cholerae and asiatic cholera. In Todar’s Online Textbook of Bacteriology, 2009;
Available online: http://www.textbookofbacteriology.net/cholera.html (assessed on 4 May 2010)
Ali, M.; Emch, M.; Yunus, M.; Sack, R.B. Are the Environmental Niches of Vibrio cholerae 0139
Different from those of Vibrio cholerae 01 El Tor? Int. J. Infect. Dis. 2001, 5, 214–219.
Ramamurthy, T.; Yamasaki, S.; Takeda, Y.; Nair, G.B. Vibrio cholerae O139 Bengal: Odyssey
of a Fortuitous Variant. Microbes Infect. 2003, 5, 329–344.
Arbora, S.; Crum, S. Medical Geography and Cholera in Perú; The Geographer‘s Craft Project,
Department of Geography, The University of Colorado at Boulder: Boulder, CO, USA, 1996;
Available online: http://www.colorado.edu/geography/gcraft/warmup/cholera/cholera_f.html
(assessed on 4 May 2010).
Glass, R.I.; Claeson, M.; Blake, P.A.; Waldmann, R.J.; Pierce, N.F. Cholera in Africa: Lessons
on Transmission and Control for Latin America. Lancet 1991, 338, 791–795.
Glass, R.I.; Libel, M.; Brandling-Bennet, A.D. Epidemic Cholera in the Americas. Science 1992,
256, 1524–1525.
Tamplin, M.L.; Parodi, C.C. Environmental Spread of Vibrio cholerae in Peru. Lancet 1991, 338,
1216–1217.
Steinberg, E.B.; Greene, K.D.; Bopp, C.A.; Cameron, D.N.; Wells, J.G.; Mintz, E.D. Cholera in
the United States, 1995–2000: Trends at the End of the Twentieth Century. J. Infect. Dis. 2001,
184, 799–802.
Meibom, K.L.; Blokesch, M.; Dolganov, N.A.; Wu, C.-Y.; Schoolnik, G.K. Chitin Induces
Natural Competence in Vibrio cholerae. Science 2005, 310, 1824–1827.
Waldor, M.K.; Mekalanos, J.J. Lysogenic Conversion by a Filamentous Phage Encoding Cholera
Toxin. Science 1996, 272, 1910–1914.
Hervio-Heath, D.; Colwell, R.R.; Derrien, A.; Robert-Pillot, A.; Fournier, J.M.; Pommepuy, M.
Occurrence of Pathogenic Vibrios in Coastal Areas of France. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2002, 92,
1123–1135.
Alam, M.; Hasan, N.A.; Sadique, A.; Bhuiyan, N.A.; Ahmed, K.U.; Nusrin, S.; Nair, G.B.;
Siddique, A.K.; Sack, R.B.; Sack, D.A.; Huq, A.; Colwell, R.R. Seasonal Cholera Caused by
Vibrio cholerae Serogroups O1 and O139 in the Coastal Aquatic Environment of Bangladesh.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 4096–4104.
Bhanumathi, R.; Sabeena, F.; Isac, S.R.; Shukla, B.N.; Singh, D.V. Molecular Characterization
of Vibrio cholerae O139 Bengal Isolated from Water and the Aquatic Plant Eichhornia crassipes
in the River Ganga, Varanasi, India. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2003, 69, 2389–2394.
Munro, P.M.; Colwell, R.R. Fate of Vibrio cholerae O1 in Seawater Microcosms. Water Res.
1996, 30, 47–50.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
25.

26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

3695

Alam, M.; Sultana, M.; Nair, G.B.; Sack, R.B.; Sack, D.A.; Siddique, A.K.; Ali, A.; Huq, A.;
Colwell, R.R. Toxigenic Vibrio cholerae in the Aquatic Environment of Mathbaria, Bangladesh.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 2849–2855.
Chaiyanan, S.; Chaiyanan, S.; Huq, A.; Maugel, T.; Colwell, R.R. Viability of the Nonculturable
Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139 System. Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 24, 331–341.
Molloy, S. Biofilms in the Time of Cholera. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 2007, 5, 906–907.
Le Minor. The genus Salmonella. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic Resource for
the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M., Falkow, S.,
Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Popoff, M.Y.; Le Minor, L.E. Genus Salmonella. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology,
2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005;
Volume 2, Part B, pp. 764–799.
Tindall, B.J.; Grimont, P.A.D.; Garrity, G.M.; Euzéby, J.P. Nomenclature and Taxonomy of the
Genus Salmonella. Int. J. Syst. Evolut. Microbiol. 2005, 55, 521–524.
Ben Aissa, R.; Al-Gallas, N.; Troudi, H.; Belhadj, N.; Belhadj, A. Trends in Salmonella enterica
Serotypes Isolated from Human, Food, Animal, and Environment in Tunisia, 1994–2004. J.
Infect. 2007, 55, 324–339.
Arvanitidou, M.; Kanellou, K.; Vagiona, D.G. Diversity of Salmonella spp. and Fungi in
Northern Greek Rivers and their Correlation to Faecal Pollution Indicators. Environ. Res. 2005,
99, 278–284.
Kapperud, G.; Rørvik, L.M.; Hasseltvedt, V.; Høiby, E.A.; Iversen, B.G.; Staveland, K.; Johnsen,
G.; Leitão, J.; Herikstad, H.; Andersson, Y.; Langeland, G.; Gondrosen, B.; Lassen, J. Outbreak
of Shigella sonnei Infection Traced to Imported Iceberg Lettuce. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1995, 33,
609–614.
Strockbine, N.A.; Maurelli, A.T. Genus Shigella. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology,
2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005;
Volume 2, Part B, pp. 811–823.
Emch, M.; Ali, M.; Yunus, M. Risk Areas and Neighborhood-Level Risk Factors for Shigella
dysenteriae 1 and Shigella flexneri. Health Place 2008, 14, 96–105.
Germani, Y.; Sansonetti, P.J. The Genus Shigella. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic
Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M.,
Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, US, 2003.
Hale, T.L. Genetic Basis of Virulence in Shigella Species. Microbiol. Rev. 1991, 55, 206–224.
Todar, K. Shigella and shigellosis. In Todar’s Online Textbook of Bacteriology, 2009; Available
online: http://www.textbookofbacteriology.net/Shigella.html (assessed on 1 September 2010).
Tetteh, G.L.; Beuchat, L.R. Survival, Growth, and Inactivation of Acid-Stressed Shigella flexneri
as Affected by pH and Temperature. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2003, 87, 131–138.
Chompook, P.; Todd, J.; Wheeler, J.G.; von Seidlein, L.; Clemens, J.; Chaicumpa, W. Risk
Factors for Shigellosis in Thailand. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 2006, 10, 425–433.
Faruque, S.M.; Khan, R.; Kamruzzman, M.; Yamasaki, S.; Ahmad, Q.S.; Azim, T.; Nair, G.B.;
Takeda, Y.; Sack, D.A. Isolation of Shigella dysenteriae type 1 and S. flexneri Strains from



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

3696

Surface Waters in Bangladesh: Comparative Molecular Analysis of Environmental Shigella
Isolates versus Clinical Strains. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2002, 68, 3908–3913.
Bettelheim, K.A. The genus Escherichia. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic Resource
for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M., Falkow, S.,
Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Scheutz, F.; Strockbine, N.A. Genus Escherichia. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology, 2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY,
USA, 2005; Volume 2, Part B, pp. 607–623.
World Health Organization. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC). In Diarrhoeal Diseases;
Available
online:
http://www.who.int/vaccine_research/diseases/diarrhoeal/en/index4.html
(assessed on 4 September 2010).
Health Canada. Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality: Guideline Technical
Document. Bacterial Waterborne Pathogens. Current and Emerging Organisms of Concern.
Health Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2006.
World Health Organization. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC). Fact sheet N°125;
Available online: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs125/en/ (assessed on 4 September
2010).
Enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC); US Department of Health & Human Services, U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Available online: http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodSafety/
FoodborneIllness/FoodborneIllnessFoodbornePathogensNaturalToxins/BadBugBook/ucm07129
8.htm (assessed on 4 September 2010).
WHO (World Health Organization). Pathogenic Mycobacteria in Water: A Guide to Public
Health Consequences, Monitoring and Management; Pedley, S., Bartram, J., Rees, G., Dufour,
A., Cotruvo J., Eds.; IWA Publishing: London, UK, 2004.
Holtzman, A.; Aronson, T.; Froman, S.; Berlin, O.G.W.; Dominguez, P.; Kunkel K.A.; Overturf,
G.; Stelma, G.; Smith, C.; Yakrus, M. The Isolation and Identification of Mycobacterium avium
Complex (MAC) Recovered from Los Angeles Potable Water, a Possible Source of Infection in
AIDS Patients. Int. J. Environ. Health Res. 1994, 4, 63–72.
Von Reyn, C.F.; Maslow, J.N.; Barber, T.W.; Falkinham, J.O.; Arbeit, R.D. Persistent
Colonisation of Potable Water, a Source of Mycobacterium avium Infection in AIDS. Lancet
1994, 343, 1137–1141.
Gião, M.S.; Azevedo, N.F.; Wilks, S.A.; Vieira, M.J.; Keevil, C.W. Persistence of Helicobacter
pylori in Heterotrophic Drinking Water Biofilms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 74,
5898–5904.
Hulten, K.; Han, S.W.; Enroth, H.; Klein, P.D.; Opekun, A.R.; Gilman, R.H.; Evans, D.G.;
Engstrand, L.; Graham, D.Y.; El-Zaatari, F.A. Helicobacter pylori in the Drinking Water in Peru.
Gastroenterology 1996, 110, 1031–1035.
Handfield, M.; Simard, P.; Couillard, M.; Letarte, R. Aeromonas hydrophila Isolated from Food
and Drinking Water: Hemagglutination, Hemolysis, and Cytotoxicity for a Human Intestinal Cell
Line (HT-29). Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1996, 62, 3459–3461.
Daskalov, H. The Importance of Aeromonas hydrophila in Food Safety. Food Control 2006, 17,
474–483.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

68.

69.

3697

Chauret, C.; Volk, C.; Creason, R.; Jarosh, J.; Robinson, J.; Warnes, C. Detection of Aeromonas
hydrophila in a Drinking-Water Distribution System: A Field and Pilot Study. Can. J. Microbiol.
2001, 47, 782–786.
Fernández, M.C.; Beatriz, N.; Giampaolo, S.B.; Ibañez, M.; Guagliardo, V.; Esnaola, M.M.;
Conca, L.; Valdivia, P.; Stagnaro, S.M.; Chiale, C.; Frade, H. Aeromonas Hydrophila and its
Relation with Drinking Water Indicators of Microbiological Quality in Argentine 2000. Genetica
2000, 108, 35–40.
George, I.; Servais, P. Sources et Dynamique des Coliformes dans le Basin de la Sein; Rapport
de Synthèse; Programme PIREN-Seine 1998–2001, Sources et dynamique des coliformes dand le
bassin de la Seine; C. N. R. S.: Paris, France, 2002.
Gauthier, F.; Archibald, F. The Ecology of ―Faecal Indicator‖ Bacteria Commonly Found in Pulp
and Paper Mill Water Systems. Water Res. 2001, 35, 2207–2218.
Wilkes, G.; Edge, T.; Gannon, V.; Jokinen, C.; Lyautey, E.; Medeiros, D.; Neumann, N.;
Ruecker, N.; Topp, E.; Lapena, D.R. Seasonal Relationships Among Indicator Bacteria,
Pathogenic Bacteria, Cryptosporidium Oocysts, Giardia Cysts, and Hydrological Indices for
Surface Waters Within an Agricultural Landscape. Water Res. 2009, 43, 2209–2223.
Saarela, M.; Lähteenmäki, L.; Crittenden, R.; Salminen, S.; Mattila-Sandholm, T. Gut Bacteria
and Health Foods—The European Perspective. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2002, 78, 99–117.
Hawksworth, G.; Drasar, B.S.; Hill, M.J. Intestinal Bacteria and the Hydrolysis of Glycoside
Bonds. J. Med. Microbiol. 1971, 4, 451–459.
Hopkins, M.J.; Sharp, R.; Macfarlane, G.T. Variation in Human Intestinal Microbiota with Age.
Digest Liver Dis. 2002, 34(Suppl.2), S12-S18.
Leclerc, H.; Moriamez, J.C. Étude Quantitative de la Flore Fécale de l‘Adulte et du Nourrison
AlimentéArtificiellement. Path. Bio. 1980, 28, 217–226.
Wilson, M. Microbial Inhabitants of Humans. Their Ecology and Role in Health and Disease;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2005.
Sinton, L.W.; Finlay, R.K.; Hannah, D.J. Distinguishing Human from Faecal Contamination in
Water: A Review. New Zealand J. Marine Freshwater Res. 1998, 32, 323–348.
Biavati, B.; Mattarelli, P. The family Bifidobacteriaceae. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving
Electronic Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.;
Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Hippe, H.; Andreesen, J.R.; Gottschalk, G. The genus Clostridium—Nonmedical. In The
Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic
release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York,
NY, USA, 2003.
Rainey, F.A.; Hollen, B.J.; Small, A. Genus Clostridium. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology, 2nd ed.; De Vos, P., Garrity, G.M., Jones, D., Krieg, N.R., Ludwig, W., Rainey,
F.A., Schleifer, K.-H., Whitman, W.B., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2009; Volume 3,
pp. 738–828.
Smith, L.D.S. The genus Clostridium—Medical. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic
Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M.,
Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
70.
71.

72.

73.
74.
75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

3698

Bezirtzoglou, E.; Panagiou, A.; Savvaidis, I.; Maipa, V. Distribution of Clostridium perfringens
in Polluted Lake Environments. Anaerobe 1997, 3, 169–172.
Švec, P.; Devriese, L.A. Genus Enterococcus. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology,
2nd ed.; DE Vos, P., Garrity, G.M., Jones, D., Krieg, N.R., Ludwig, W., Rainey, F.A., Schleifer,
K.-H., Whitman, W.B., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2009; Volume 3, pp. 594–607.
Pinto, B.; Pierotti, R.; Canale, G.; Reali, D. Characterization of ‗Faecal Streptococci‘ as
Indicators of Faecal Pollution and Distribution in the Environment. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 1999,
29, 258–263.
Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, 9th ed.; Holt, J.G., et al., Eds.; Williams &
Wilkins: Baltimore, MD, USA, 1994; pp. 175–190.
Gordon, D.M.; FitzGibbon, F. The Distribution of Enteric Bacteria from Australian Mammals:
Host and Geographical Effects. Microbiology 1999, 145, 2663–2671.
Frederiksen, W.; Søgaard, P. The genus Citrobacter. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving Electronic
Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.; Dworkin, M.,
Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Frederiksen, W. Genus Citrobacter. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, 2nd ed.;
Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005; Volume 2,
Part B, pp. 651–656.
Grimont, F.; Grimont, P.A.D.; Richard, C. The Genus Klebsiella. In The Prokaryotes: An
Evolving Electronic Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th
ed.; Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Grimont, P.A.D.; Grimont, F. Genus Klebsiella. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology,
2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005;
Volume 2, Part B, pp. 685–693.
Grimont, F.; Grimont, P.A.D. The Genus Enterobacter. In The Prokaryotes: An Evolving
Electronic Resource for the Microbiological Community, electronic release 3.14, 3th ed.;
Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Grimont, P.A.D.; Grimont, F. Genus Enterobacter. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology, 2nd ed.; Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., Staley, J.T., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY,
USA, 2005; Volume 2, Part B, pp. 661–669.
Lockhart, S.R.; Abramson, M.A.; Beekmann, S.E.; Gallagher, G.; Riedel, S.; Diekema, D.J.;
Quinn, J.P.; Doern, G.V. Antimicrobial Resistance Among Gram-negative Bacilli Causing
Infections in Intensive Care Unit Patients in the United States between 1993 and 2004. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 2007, 45, 3352–3359.
Hidron, A.I.; Edwards, J.R.; Patel, J.; Horan, T.C.; Sievert, D.M.; Pollock, D.A. NHSN Annual
Update: Antimicrobial Resistant Pathogens Associated with Healthcare-Associated Infections:
Annual Summary of Data Reported to the National Healthcare Safety Network at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2006–2007. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2008, 29,
996–1011.
Ashbolt, N.J.; Grabow, O.K.; Snozzi, M. Indicators of microbial water quality. In Water Quality:
Guidelines, Standards and Health; Fewtrell, L., Bartram, J., Eds.; World Health Organization
(WHO), IWA Publishing: London, UK, 2001; pp. 289–316.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
84.

85.

86.

87.
88.

89.
90.

91.
92.
93.
94.

95.

96.

97.
98.

3699

Payment, P.; Waite, M.; Dufour, A. Introducing parameters for the assessment of drinking water
quality. In Assessing Microbial Safety of Drinking Water. Improving Approaches and Method;
WHO & OECD, IWA Publishing: London, UK, 2003; pp. 47–77.
Cabral, J.P.; Marques, C. Faecal Coliform Bacteria in Febros river (Northwest Portugal):
Temporal Variation, Correlation with Water Parameters, and Species Identification. Environ.
Monit. Assess. 2006, 118, 21–36.
Villarino, A.; Toribio, A.L.; Brena, B.M.; Grimont, P.A.D.; Bouvet, O.M.M. On the Relationship
Between the Physiological State of Bacteria and Rapid Enzymatic Assays of Faecal Coliforms in
the Environment. Biotechnol. Lett. 2003, 25, 1329–1334.
George, I.; Petit, M.; Servais, P. Use of Enzymatic Methods for Rapid Enumeration of Coliforms
in Freshwaters. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2000, 88, 404–413.
George, I.; Petit, M.; Theate; C.; Servais, P. Distribution of Coliforms in the Seine River and
Estuary (France) Studied by Rapid Enzymatic Methods and Plate Counts. Estuaries 2001, 24,
994–1002.
Nelis, H.; van Poucke, S. Enzymatic Detection of Coliforms and Escherichia coli Within 4 Hours.
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 2000, 123, 43–52.
Rompré, A.; Servais, P.; Baudart, J.; de-Roubin, M.-R.; Laurent, P. Detection and Enumeration
of Coliforms in Drinking Water: Current Methods and Emerging Approaches. J. Microbiol.
Method. 2002, 49, 31–54.
Van Poucke, S.O.; Nelis, H.J. Rapid Detection of Fluorescent and Chemiluminescent Total
Coliforms and Escherichia coli on Membrane Filters. J. Microbiol. Method. 2000, 42, 233–244.
Kämpfer, P.; Rauhoff, O.; Dott, W. Glycosidase Profiles of Members of the Family
Enterobacteriaceae. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1991, 29, 2877–2879.
Kilian, M.; Bülow, P. Rapid Diagnoses of Enterobacteriaceae. I. Detection of Bacterial
Glycosidases. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scandinavica 1976, 84, 245–251.
Muytjens, H.L.; van der Ros-van de Repe, J.; nan Druten, H.A.M. Enzymatic Profiles of
Enterobacter sakazakii and Related Species with Special Reference to the α-Glucosidase
Reaction and Reproducibility of the Test System. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1984, 20, 684–686.
Tryland, I.; Fiksdal, L. Enzyme Characteristics of β-D-Galactosidase- and β-D-GlucuronidasePositive Bacteria and their Interference in Rapid Methods for Detection of Waterborne Coliforms
and Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1998, 64, 1018–1023.
Köster, W.; Egli, T.; Ashbolt, N.; Botzenhart, K; Burlion, N.; Endo, T.; Grimont, P.; Guillot, E.;
Mabilat, C.; Newport, L.; Niemi, M.; Payment, P.; Prescott, A.; Renaud, P.; Rust, A. Analytical
methods for microbiological water quality testing. In Assessing Microbial Safety of Drinking
Water. Improving Approaches and Method; WHO & OECD, IWA Publishing: London, UK,
2003; pp. 237–292.
Manafi, M.; Kneifel, W.; Bascomb, S. Fluorogenic and Chromogenic Substrates Used in
Bacterial Diagnostics. Microbiol. Rev. 1991, 55, 335–348.
Geissler, K.; Manafi, M.; Amorós, I.; Alonso, J.L. Quantitative Determination of Total Coliforms
and Escherichia coli in Marine Waters with Chromogenic and Fluorogenic Media. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 2000, 88, 280–285.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7
99.

3700

Byamukama, D.; Kansiime, F.; Mach, R.L.; Farnleitner, A.H. Determination of Escherichia coli
Contamination with Chromocult Coliform Agar Showed a High Level of Discrimination
Efficiency for Differing Faecal Pollution Levels in Tropical Waters of Kampala, Uganda. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66, 864–868.
100. Eccles, J.P.; Searle, R.; Holt, D.; Dennis, P.J. A Comparison of Methods Used to Enumerate
Escherichia coli in Conventionally Treated Sewage Sludge. J. App. Microbiol. 2004, 96,
375–383.
101. Farnleitner, A.H.; Hocke, L.; Beiwl, C.; Kavka, G.G.; Zechmeister, T.; Kirschner, A.K.T.; Mach,
R.L. Rapid Enzymatic Detection of Escherichia coli Contamination in Polluted River Water. Lett.
Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 33, 246–250.
102. Edberg, S.C.; Kontnick, C.M. Comparison of β-Glucuronidase-Based Substrate Systems for
Identification of Escherichia coli. J. Clin. Microbiol. 1986, 24, 368–371.
103. Leclerc, H.; Mossel, D.A.A.; Edberg, S.C.; Struijk, C.B. Advances in the Bacteriology of the
Coliform Group: their Suitability as Markers of Microbial Water Safety. Ann. Rev. Microbiol.
2001, 55, 201–234.
104. Klein, G. Taxonomy, Ecology and Antibiotic Resistance of Enterococci from Food and the
Gastro-Intestinal Tract. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2003, 88, 123–131.
105. Kühn, I.; Iversen, A.; Burman, L.G.; Olsson-Liljequist, B.; Franklin, A.; Finn, M.; Aarestrup, F.;
Seyfarth, A.M.; Blanch, A.R.; Vilanova, X.; Taylor, H.; Caplin, J.; Moreno, M.A.; Dominguez,
L.; Herrero, I.A.; Möllby, R. Comparison of Enterococcal Populations in Animals, Humans, and
the Environment—An European Study. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2003, 88, 133–145.
106. Wheeler, A.L.; Hartel, P.G.; Godfrey, D.G.; Hill, J.L.; Segars, W.I. Potentital of Enterococcus
faecalis as a Human Fecal Indicator for Microbial Source Tracking. J. Environ. Qual. 2002, 31,
1286–1293.
107. Geldreich, E.E. Fecal Coliform and Fecal Streptococcus Density Relationships in Waste
Discharges and Receiving Waters. Crit. Rev. Environ. Control 1976, 6, 349–369.
108. Doran, J.W.; Linn, D.M. Bacteriological Quality of Runoff Water from Pasteureland. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 1979, 37, 985–991.
109. Caplenas, N.J.; Kanarek, M.S. Thermotolerant Non-Fecal Source of Klebsiella pneumoniae:
Validity of the Fecal Coliform Test in Recreational Waters. Am. J. Public Health 1984, 74,
1273–1275.
110. Gauthier, F.; Neufeld, J.D.; Driscoll, B.T.; Archibald, F.S. Coliform Bacteria and Nitrogen
Fixation in Pulp and Paper Mill Effluent Treatment Systems. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66,
5155–5160.
111. Corso, P.S.; Kramer, M.H.; Blair, K.A.; Addiss, D.G.; Davis, J.P.; Haddix, A.C. Cost of Illness
in the 1993 Waterborne Cryptosporidium Outbreak, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Emerg. Inf. Dis.
2003, 9, 426–431.
112. MacKenzie, W.R.; Hoxie, N.J.; Proctor, M.E.; Gradus, M.S.; Blair, K.A.; Peterson, D.E.;
Kazmierczak, J.J.; Addiss, D.G.; Fox, K.R.; Rose, J.B.; Davis, J.P. A Massive Outbreak in
Milwaukee of Cryptosporidium Infection Transmitted Through the Public Water Supply. N. Engl.
J. Med. 1994, 331, 161–167.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3701

113. Vilanova, X.; Manero, A.; Cerdà-Cuéllar, M.; Blanch, A.R. The Composition and Persistence of
Faecal Coliforms and Enterococcal Populations in Sewage Treatment Plants. J. Appl. Microbiol.
2004, 96, 279–288.
114. Araujo, M.; Sueiro, R.A.; Gómez, M.J.; Garrido, M.J. Enumeration of Clostridium perfringens
Spores in Groundwater Samples: Comparison of Six Culture Media. J. Microbiol. Methods 2004,
57, 175–180.
115. Charriere, G.; Mossel, D.A.A.; Beaudeau, P.; Leclerc, H. Assessment of the Marker Value of
Various Components of the Coli-Aerogenes Group of Enterobacteriaceae and of a Selection of
Enterococcus spp. for the Official Monitoring of Drinking Water Supplies. J. Appl. Bacteriol.
1994, 76, 336–344.
116. Martins, M.T.; Sato, M.I.Z.; Alves, M.N.; Stoppe, N.C.; Prado, V.M.; Sanchez, P.S. Assessment
of Microbiological Quality for Swimming Pools in South America. Water Res. 1995, 29,
2417–2420.
117. Ferguson, C.M.; Coote, B.G.; Ashbolt, N.J.; Stevenson, I.M. Relationships Between Indicators,
Pathogens and Water Quality in an Estuary System. Water Res. 1996, 30, 2045–2054.
118. Medema, G.J.; van Asperen, I.A.; Havelaar, A.H. Assessment of the Exposure of Swimmers to
Microbiological Contaminants in Fresh Waters. Water Sci. Technol. 1997, 35, 157–163.
119. Polo, F.; Figueras, M.J.; Inza, I.; Sala, J.; Fleisher, J.M.; Guarro, J. Relationship Between
Presence of Salmonella and Indicators of Faecal Pollution in Aquatic Habitats. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 1998, 160, 253–256.
120. Noble, R.T.; Leecaster, M.K.; McGee, C.D.; Weisberg, S.B.; Ritter K. Comparison of Bacterial
Indicator Analysis Methods in Stormwater-Affected Coastal Waters. Water Res. 2004, 38,
1183–1188.
121. Harwood, V.J.; Levine, A.D.; Scott, T.M.; Chivukula, V.; Lukasik, J.; Farrah, S.R.; Rose, J.B.
Validity of the Indicator Organism Paradigm for Pathogen Reduction in Reclaimed Water and
Public Health Protection. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2005, 71, 3163–3170.
122. Touron, A.; Berthe, T.; Gargala, G.; Fournier, M.; Ratajczak, M.; Servais, P.; Petit, F.
Assessment of Faecal Contamination and the Relationship Between Pathogens and Faecal
Bacterial Indicators in an Estuarine Environment (Seine, France). Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2007, 54,
1441–1450.
123. Garrido-Pérez, M.C.; Anfuso, E.; Acevedo, A.; Perales-Vargas-Machuca, J.A. Microbial
Indicators of Faecal Contamination in Waters and Sediments of Beach Bathing Zones. Int. J. Hyg.
Environ. Health 2008, 211, 510–517.
124. Ashbolt, N.; Fujioka, R.; Glymph, T.; McGee, C.; Schaub, S.; Sobsey, M.; Toranzos, G.
Pathogen indicators, and indicators of fecal contamination. In Report of the Experts Scientific
Workshop on Critical Research Needs for the Development of New or Revised Recreational
Water Quality; EPA 823-R-07–006; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water,
Office of Research and Development: Warrenton, VA, 2007; Chapter 2, pp. 35–56.
125. Ferreira, A.P. Caffeine as an Environmental Indicator for Assessing Urban Aquatic Ecosystems.
Cad. Saúde Pública 2005, 21, 1884–1892.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3702

126. Gardinali, P.R.; Zhao, X. Trace Determination of Caffeine in Surface Water Samples by Liquid
Chromatography-Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Ionization–Sass spectrometry (LC-APCI-MS).
Environ. Int. 2002, 28, 521–528.
127. Peeler, K.A.; Opsahl, S.P.; Chanton, J.P. Tracking Anthropogenic Inputs Using Caffeine,
Indicator Bacteria, and Nutrients in Rural Freshwater and Urban Marine Systems Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2006, 40, 7616–7622.
128. Scott, T.M.; J.B.; Rose, T.M.; Jenkins, S.; Farrah, R.; Lukasik, J. Microbial Source Tracking:
Current Methodology and Future Directions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2002, 68, 5796–5803.
129. Wu, J.; Yue, J.; Hu, R.; Yang, Z.; Zhang, L. Use of Caffeine and Human Pharmaceutical
Compounds to Identify Sewage Contamination. World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2008, 44,
438–442.
130. Isobe, K.O.; Tarao, M.; Chiem, N.H.; Minh, L.Y.; Takada, H. Effect of Environmental Factors on
the Relationship between Concentrations of Coprostanol and Fecal Indicator Bacteria in Tropical
(Mekong Delta) and Temperate (Tokyo) Freshwaters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70,
814–821.
131. Medema, G.J; Shaw, S.; Waite, M.; Snozzi, M.; Morreau, A.; Grabow, W. Catchment
characteristics and source water quality. In Assessing Microbial Safety of Drinking Water.
Improving Approaches and Method; WHO & OECD, IWA Publishing: London, UK, 2003;
pp. 111–158.
132. EPA. Source Water Protection Practices Bulletin. Managing Stormwater Runoff to Prevent
Contamination of Drinking Water; Office of Water (4606); United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA): Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
133. Ferguson D.M.; Moore, D.F.; Getrich, M.A.; Zhowandai, M.H. Enumeration and Speciation of
Enterococci Found in Marine and Intertidal Sediments and Coastal Water in Southern California.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 2005, 99, 598–608.
134. Boualam, M.; Mathieu, L.; Fass, S.; Cavard, J.; Gatel, D. Relationship between Coliform
Culturability and Organic Matter in Low Nutritive Waters. Water Res. 2002, 36, 2618–2626.
135. Boualam, M.; Fass, S.; Saby, S.; Lahoussine, V.; Cavard, J.; Gatel, D.; Mathieu, L. Organic
Matter Quality and Survival of Coliforms in Low-Nutrient Waters. J. AWWA 2003, 95, 119–126.
136. Baudišová, D. Evaluation of Escherichia coli as the Main Indicator of Faecal Pollution. Water
Sci. Technol. 1997, 35, 333–336.
137. Edberg, S.C.; Rice, E.W.; Karlin, R.J.; Allen, M.J. Escherichia coli: The Best Biological
Drinking Water Indicator for Public Health Protection. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2000, 88, 106S–116S.
138. Byappanahalli, M.N.; Whitman, R.L.; Shively, D.A.; Sadowsky, M.J.; Ishii, S. Population
Structure, Persistence, and Seasonality of Autochthonous Escherichia coli in Temperate, Coastal
Forest Soil from a Great Lakes Watershed. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 8, 504–513.
139. Ishii, S.; Yan, T.; Shively, D.A.; Byappanahalli, M.N.; Whitman, R.L.; Sadowsky, M.J.
Cladophora (Chlorophyta) spp. Harbor Human Bacterial Pathogens in Nearshore Water of Lake
Michigan. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 4545–4553.
140. Ishii, S.; Ksoll, W.B.; Hicks, R.E.; Sadowsky, M.J. Presence and Growth of Naturalized
Escherichia coli in Temperate Soils from Lake Superior Watersheds. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
2006, 72, 612–621.



Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2010, 7

3703

141. Ksoll, W.B.; Ishii, S.; Sadowsky, M.J.; Hicks, R.E. Presence and Sources of Fecal Coliform
Bacteria in Epilithic Periphyton Communities of Lake Superior. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007,
73, 3771–3778.
142. Hecq, P.; Hulsmann, A.; Hauchman, F.S.; McLain, J.L.; Schmitz, F. Drinking water regulations.
In Analytical Methods for Drinking Water; Quevauviller, P., Thompson, K.C., Eds.; John Wiley:
London, UK, 2006; Chapter 1.
143. Total Coliform Rule: A Handbook for Small Noncommunity Water Systems Serving less than
3,300 Persons; EPA 816-B-06–001; Office of Water (4606M), EPA: Washington, DC, USA,
2006.
144. Espigares, M.; Coca, C.; Fernández-Crehuet, M.; Moreno, O.; Gálvez, R. Chemical and
Microbiologic Indicators of Faecal Contamination in the Guadalquivir (Spain). Eur. Water Pollut.
Control 1996, 6, 7–13.
© 2010 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

