Original Article

Shigellosis Among Swimmers in a Freshwater
Lake
Martha Iwamoto, MD, MPH, Gary Hlady, MD, MS, Monica Jeter, BA, Cindy Burnett,
Cherie Drenzek, DVM, MS, Susan Lance, DVM, PHD, James Benson, BS,
David Page, MD, MPH, and Paul Blake, MD, MPH

Objective: Shigella infection is highly communicable; however,
outbreaks associated with swimming in recreational fresh water are
rarely identified.
Materials and Methods: A cohort study of lake visitors was performed.
Results: Seventeen (24.6%) case patients among 69 persons who
visited the lake over the holiday weekend were identified. Attack
rates increased with increasing exposure to lake water; the risk of
illness was greatest among swimmers who reported getting lake
water in their mouths (relative risk ⫽ 5.37, 95% confidence interval
⫽ 2.2, 13.3). Shigella sonnei was isolated from stool samples of four
of eight swimmers tested.
Conclusions: The outbreak likely was caused by fecal contamination of lake water by an infected swimmer; there was no evidence of
sewage contamination into the lake. Fresh water is a potential source
of infection in patients with acute gastroenteritis and recent exposure. Since testing and chlorination of lake water is impractical,
prevention relies on avoidance of fecal contamination and/or minimizing ingestion of the water.
Key Words: recreational water, shigellosis, swimming, waterborne
disease outbreaks

S

higella infection is highly communicable. Transmission
occurs through direct or indirect contact with feces of
infected persons, and ingestion of as few as 10 viable organ-

From Epidemic Intelligence Service, Epidemiology Program Office, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA; Georgia Department of
Human Resources, Division of Public Health, Atlanta, GA; Coastal Health
District, Brunswick, GA; and Georgia Department of Human Resources,
Georgia Public Health Laboratory, Atlanta, GA.
Reprint requests to Martha Iwamoto, MD, MPH, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road NE, Mailstop C-09, Atlanta, GA
30333. Email: miwamoto@cdc.gov
Accepted April 1, 2005.
The use of trade names and commercial sources is for information only and
does not imply endorsement by the Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, or the Georgia Department of Human Resources.
Copyright © 2005 by The Southern Medical Association
0038-4348/0⫺2000/9800-0774

774

MPH,

isms is sufficient for infection to occur.1 Outbreaks have been
associated with person-to-person transmission in crowded environments, ingestion of contaminated food and water and,
less commonly, swimming in recreational fresh water. During
1991 to 2000, 11 Shigella outbreaks associated with recreational water in the United States were reported to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention.2– 6 Shigellosis is endemic
in tropical and temperate climates, and epidemic cycles have
been described. The incidence of shigellosis in Georgia increases and decreases in cycles lasting approximately 7 years;
since 2001, an increase in laboratory-confirmed cases has
occurred throughout the state (unpublished data; Georgia Department of Human Resources, Division of Public Health
[GDPH]).
On May 27, 2003, a local health department in Georgia
was notified that an 11-year-old girl had fever, bloody diarrhea, vomiting, and headache 2 days after swimming in a
freshwater lake at a county park over Memorial Day weekend, May 24 to 26. She had a diagnosis of bacterial dysentery,
and a stool culture confirmed Shigella sonnei infection. The
patient’s mother was aware of other park visitors having similar symptoms. Epidemiologists from the GDPH assisted the
local health department in an investigation to confirm the
existence of an outbreak, assess risk factors, and determine
the source of infection.

Key Points
• Lake water was the vehicle of transmission for Shigella sonnei.
• The most likely source of Shigella in the lake water
was transient fecal contamination by an infected swimmer.
• Since there are no reliable methods for determining if
fresh water is contaminated, prevention relies on
avoidance of contamination and minimizing ingestion
of lake water.

© 2005 Southern Medical Association



Original Article

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Statistical analysis

Epidemiologic investigation

Information was entered and analyzed using Epi Info
6.04 (CDC; Atlanta, GA). ␹2 tests and Fisher exact tests were
used to evaluate measures of significance. Probability values
of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Case finding. To determine if there were additional patients with culture-confirmed Shigella infection that had been
to the county park, we interviewed ill patients about other ill
contacts, reviewed routine surveillance reports and records in
three local laboratories, and interviewed local pediatricians
and family practitioners in the county. We also searched emergency department records at the one hospital that serves the
county and surrounding area to identify patients presenting
with vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain during May 2003.
Persons with laboratory-confirmed Shigella infection during
the last 2 weeks of May and first week of June 2003 were
interviewed by telephone about exposures at the county park.

Environmental inspection
We visited the park facilities, and park operations were
reviewed. The bathroom facilities were inspected, and a fluorescein dye study was performed to evaluate the integrity of
the septic system. Lake water samples from the swimming
area collected May 27 and June 5, 2003, were cultured for
fecal coliform bacteria. The sample collected on June 5, 2003,
was also cultured for Shigella.

Results
Cohort study

Epidemiologic investigation

Based on the original report of other park visitors with
illness and the results of case findings, which supported the
association between illness and park exposure, we performed
a cohort study of persons who visited the park over Memorial
Day weekend, May 24 to 26, 2003. We set out to determine
if unreported cases of diarrheal illness had occurred and
whether such cases were associated with exposure to the lake
water. The park recorded only visitors who registered for the
campground or a picnic pavilion. Members of the cohort were
identified through park registries, interviews with registered
visitors who reported other family members and friends at the
park at the same time, and interviews of persons with laboratory-confirmed Shigella infection who reported visiting the
park. A questionnaire was administered to the cohort by telephone to inquire about park activities, including date, time,
duration, and type of lake exposure (ie, wading in the water,
face immersion, or swallowing water), clinical symptoms,
and dates of illness onset. We defined a case as vomiting or
diarrhea in a park visitor that began 1 to 4 days after visiting
the county park. Persons whose symptoms began 2 or more
days after another household member’s illness were considered to have possible secondary causes and were excluded
from the analysis. Stool testing was offered to park visitors
who met our case definition. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
(PFGE) was performed on Shigella isolates available for subtyping.

Case finding. Laboratory records showed that S sonnei
was isolated from stool samples from five patients during the
last 2 weeks of May 2003. Of these five culture-positive
patients, two reported lake exposure at the park and two
reported no park exposure; we were unable to contact one
patient. The two patients who reported park exposure met our
case definition and were part of the cohort study. Local pediatricians and family practitioners reported no notable increase in patients with diarrheal disease and no patients with
bloody diarrhea. Emergency department records revealed no
additional cases clinically compatible with shigellosis.

Cohort study

To determine if the lake was a continuing source of
Shigella infection, we similarly identified and surveyed persons who visited the park on the weekend of May 31 through
June 1, 2003. Weekday attendance at the park was very low.
Stool samples from park visitors who reported diarrheal illness were submitted for bacterial culture.

From park records and interviews with known park visitors, we located and surveyed 69 members of 20 households
who had visited the park during Memorial Day weekend,
May 24 to 26, 2003. Of these 69 park visitors, 17 (24.6%) had
illness meeting the case definition (Fig. 1). Symptoms included diarrhea (100%), abdominal pain (76%), fever (71%),
headache (59%), vomiting (53%), and bloody diarrhea (47%).
Median age of the patients was 10.5 years (range, 17 months
to 55 years). Of the 17 patients, 13 (76.5%) reported contact
with lake water on May 24 and/or May 25, 2003; median time
between lake exposure and onset of symptoms was 2 days
(range, 1 to 3 days).
Exposure to lake water was the only risk factor significantly associated with illness. The attack rate among park
visitors increased with the degree of lake water exposure
(Table 1). Park visitors who reported any contact with lake
water had 3.4 times higher risk of developing illness (13
cases/34 persons with lake water exposure) than those who
reported no lake water exposure (4 cases/35 persons without
lake water exposure) (P ⫽ 0.01, 95% confidence interval ⫽
1.2 to 9.3). Among those with lake exposure, persons who
reported getting water in their mouths had 7.4 times higher

Southern Medical Journal • Volume 98, Number 8, August 2005

775

Study of ongoing transmission



Iwamoto • Shigellosis Among Swimmers in a Freshwater Lake

ranged from 1 to 4 days. Stool samples collected from all
three ill persons, 1 to 13 days after illness onset were negative
for Shigella.

Environmental investigation

Fig. Period of lake exposure, illness onset, and incubation period among patients with reported lake water exposure on May
24 and/or 25, 2003, in Georgia.

risk of becoming ill (12 cases/21 persons who reported lake
water in mouth) than those who only waded in the water (1
case/13 persons who waded in water) (P ⫽ 0.005, 95% confidence interval ⫽ 1.1 to 50.6). The amount of time spent in
the water was similar among those who became ill and those
who did not become ill. Eleven of the 13 ill persons with lake
water exposure had lake contact on one day only, either May
24 or May 25 (Fig. 1). Persons who were exposed to lake
water only on May 24 only had 4.1 times greater risk of
developing illness (8 cases/11 persons with exposure to lake
water on May 24 only, 73%) than persons exposed to lake
water the next day, May 25 only (3 cases/17 persons with
exposure to lake water on May 25 only, 18%) (P ⬍ 0.01, 95%
confidence interval ⫽ 1.4 to 12.2). There was no association
between illness and use of drinking water facilities.
Eight of the 17 patients submitted a stool sample for
testing, and S sonnei was isolated from samples from four
patients. Antibiotic sensitivity patterns of the isolates were
similar; all four were sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, and tetracycline and had
intermediate sensitivity to ampicillin. Three of the Shigella
isolates were identical by PFGE. The fourth isolate was very
similar, with only a single band deletion; this minimal variability and the epidemiologic connection make it likely that
this person was infected with the same strain (CDC, personal
communication).

Study of ongoing transmission
We surveyed 32 persons from eight family groups who
visited the park during May 31 to June 5, 2003. Twenty
persons (62.5%) recalled lake exposure. Of the 20, 3 (15%)
reported diarrhea and abdominal pain. Incubation periods

776

The park is a 1,100-acre public facility owned by the
county. The park facilities include a freshwater lake with a
swimming beach area, picnic pavilions with tables, and a
campground. The 9-acre manmade lake has no outlet. A 0.5acre section of the lake is designated for swimming with a
414-foot beach access. Bathroom facilities are available near
the swimming area. Food was not sold at the park. Park staff
estimated that 200 to 300 persons visited the lake during
Memorial Day Weekend, May 24 to 26, 2003.
The bathroom facilities at the swimming area were well
maintained and of adequate capacity. Hand washing facilities
were available. The septic system consisted of two septic
tanks and three drain fields per tank. The drain fields were 80
to 300 feet from the lake shore. Dye testing found no sewage
leaks. A sample of water collected from the swimming area
on May 27, 2003, revealed 160 fecal coliform bacteria per
100 mL. A sample collected June 5, 2003, 12 days after the
exposure of the index case, had 230 fecal coliform bacteria
per 100 mL, slightly above recommended guidelines. Attempts to isolate Shigella from this lake water sample were
not successful.

Discussion
The epidemiologic findings of this investigation demonstrate that lake water was the likely vehicle of transmission
for S sonnei. Transmission can occur through ingestion of
contaminated water, and outbreaks of shigellosis caused by
swimming in fresh water have been reported.7–10 Exposure to
lake water was strongly associated with diarrheal disease.
Furthermore, S sonnei was isolated from stool samples from
four swimmers, and the similar antibiotic susceptibility and
PFGE patterns among isolates suggest a common source of
infection. Incubation periods between lake exposure and onset of illness were consistent with Shigella infection. Attack
rates varied with the degree of water exposure; the risk of
illness was greatest among swimmers who reported getting
lake water in their mouths or swallowing water. We were not
able to contact all persons who swam in the lake, but estimates using the proportion of ill persons among those we
contacted and the estimated number of park visitors suggest
that more than 60 persons may have became ill during this
outbreak.
In this outbreak, the most likely source of Shigella organisms in the lake water was transient fecal contamination
by an infected swimmer. No sewage contamination was detected. Water can become contaminated through transfer of
organisms from the feces of an infected person who defecates
in the water or has inadequate hygiene. Fecal excretion of
© 2005 Southern Medical Association



Original Article

Table. Associations of lake water exposure and lake water in mouth with illness among park visitors: Georgia, May
24 to 25, 2003
Exposure
Park visitor (n⫽69)
No reported lake water exposure
Lake water exposure
Persons with lake water exposure (n⫽34)
No lake water in mouth
Lake water in mouth

Ill

Well

Total

Attack rate

Relative risk

95% CI

4
13

31
21

35
34

11%
38%

Ref.
3.4

–
1.2–9.3

1
12

12
9

13
21

8%
57%

Ref.
7.4

–
1.1–50.6

Shigella can be 103 to 109 organisms per gram of stool, and
the infectious dose is as small as 10 to 100 organisms.1 Humans are the reservoir. Transmission of the organism was
greatest on Saturday, May 24, and the risk of illness decreased by 4-fold the next day, suggesting that the water was
less contaminated. We could not document that the lake was
a continuing source of infection after May 25. Transmission
usually lasts only a few days after contamination; however,
prolonged outbreaks have been documented.8,9
Routine monitoring of the lake water would not have
prevented this outbreak; there are no reliable methods for
determining if fresh water is contaminated with Shigella. The
Environmental Protection Agency has guidelines for periodic
sampling of recreational waters to monitor bacterial water
quality, but these provide no protection from transient or
sudden contamination of untreated freshwater by Shigella or
other enteric pathogens.11,12 The infectious dose of Shigella
is very small, and routine monitoring for fecal coliform bacteria or other bacterial indicators may not detect low concentrations of organisms or transient contamination. The sensitivity of culturing Shigella from water is low, and little is
known about the survival of Shigella in freshwater environments. However, in experimental settings, Shigella survived
for up to 12 days in pond water samples.13 Shigella is effectively inactivated in chlorinated water, as specified for treated
pool or drinking water. However, chlorination of freshwater
bodies that naturally contain organic matter that inactivates
chlorine is difficult and not practical to maintain at levels
adequate to kill Shigella.
Interpretation of findings from this investigation is subject to several limitations. There were no records of all visitors to the swimming area. In retrospective studies such as
this, recall bias concerning exposure among persons can occur and exaggerate the risk if patients are more likely to recall
their exposure. Shigella are not hardy organisms, so isolation
from stool and environmental samples is difficult and sensitivity is low. Improper storage of stool samples and collection
after the acute illness has passed may have contributed to the
negative culture results in our investigation. Stool samples
were not tested for viruses, and we cannot exclude viral pathogens as causative agents among some persons who reported
illness.
Southern Medical Journal • Volume 98, Number 8, August 2005

Clinicians should consider recreational fresh water as a
potential source of infection among patients with acute gastroenteritis and recent exposure. It is important to talk to
patients and parents about the risks associated with swimming in recreational waters. Prevention of transmission of
Shigella and other enteric pathogens by recreational fresh
water depends on prevention of fecal contamination of the
water and/or minimizing ingestion of the water, since continuous monitoring of water for enteric pathogens is not currently possible and chlorination of lake water is not practical.
Recommended prevention measures during this outbreak included encouraging proper hygiene for swimmers, frequent
restroom visits with proper hand washing after bathroom use
or diaper change, exclusion of swimmers with gastrointestinal illness, close supervision of diaper-aged children, provision of alternate play areas for diaper-aged children, and discouragement of drinking lake water and defecation in water.
Prompt reporting of gastrointestinal illnesses associated with
recreational water to public health authorities will facilitate
detection of outbreaks and will help define appropriate control measures.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Saroyi Morris, Stanley Santee, Nancy
Morris, Jennifer Foster, Randy McCall, Julie Magri, Bob
Manning, and Timothy Barrett, who contributed to this investigation. We are indebted to the park visitors for their
cooperation.

References
1. DuPont HI, Levin MM, Homick RB, Formal SB. Inoculum size in
shigellosis and implications for expected mode of transmission. J Infect
Dis 1989;159:1126–1128.
2. Moore AC, Herwaldt BL, Craun GF, Calderon RL, Highsmith AK,
Juranek DD. Surveillance for waterborne disease outbreaks: United
States, 1991–1992. In: CDC Surveillance Summaries, November 19,
1993. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1993;42(SS-5):1–21.
3. Kramer MH, Herwaldt BL, Craun GF, Calderon RL, Juranek DD. Surveillance for waterborne disease outbreaks: United States, 1993–1994.
In: CDC Surveillance Summaries, April 12, 1996. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1996;45(SS-1):1–33.
4. Levy DA, Bens MS, Craun GF, Calderon RL, Herwaldt BL. Surveil-

777



Iwamoto • Shigellosis Among Swimmers in a Freshwater Lake

lance for waterborne disease outbreaks: United States, 1995–1996. In:
CDC Surveillance Summaries, December 11, 1998. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1998;47(SS-5):1–34.
5. Barwick RS, Levy DA, Craun GF, Beach MJ, Calderon RL. Surveillance
for waterborne disease outbreaks: United States, 1997–1998. In: CDC
Surveillance Summaries, May 26, 2000. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2000;49(SS-5):1–35.
6. Lee SH, Levy DA, Craun GF, Beach MJ, Calderon RL. Surveillance for
waterborne disease outbreaks: United,1999 –2000. In: CDC Surveillance
Summaries, November 22, 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002;
51(SS-8):1–47.

9. Makintubee S, Mallonee J, Istre GR. Shigellosis outbreak associated
with swimming. Am J Public Health 1987;77:166–168.
10. Sorvillo FJ, Waterman SH, Vogt JK, et al. Shigellosis associated with
recreational water contact in Los Angeles County. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1988;38:613–617.
11. Environmental Protection Agency. Bacterial water quality standards for
recreational waters (freshwater and marine waters): status report.
Washington, DC: Environmental Protection Agency, June 2003. (Accessed March 22, 2005, at http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/beaches/
local/statrept.pdf).

7. Rosenberg MS, Hazlet KK, Schaefer J, Wells JG, Pruneda RC. Shigellosis from swimming. JAMA 1976;236:1849–1852.

12. Calderon RL, Wood EW, DuFour AP. Health effects of swimmers and
nonpoint sources of contaminated water. Int J Environ Health Res 1991;
1:21–31.

8. Keene WE, McAnulty JM, Hoesly FC, et al. A swimming-associated
outbreak of hemorrhagic colitis caused by Escherichia coli O157:H7 and
Shigella sonnei. N Engl J Med 1994;331:579–584.

13. Mitscherlich E, Marth EH. Microbial survival in the environment: bacteria and rickettsiae important in human and animal health. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlab, 1984:693-704.

Be who you are and say what you feel, because those
who mind don’t matter and those who matter don’t
mind.
––Dr. Seuss

778

© 2005 Southern Medical Association

