Predicting likelihood of gastroenteritis from

sea

bathing:

results

from randomised exposure

Summary

Introduction

The health effects of bathing in coastal waters is an area of
scientific controversy. We conducted the first ever
randomised "trial" of an environmental exposure to
measure the health effects of this activity. The trial was
spread over four summers in four UK resorts and 1216
adults took part. Detailed interviews were used to collect
data on potential confounding factors and intensive water
quality monitoring was used to provide more precise
indices of exposure. 548
people were randomised to
bathing, and the exposure included total immersion of the
head. Crude rates of gastroenteritis were significantly
higher in the exposed group (14&middot;8 per 100) than the

There is a widespread belief that sea bathing may lead to
illness’ but evidence for such an association has proved
elusive. No consistent relation between any single
microbiological indicator of water quality and disease has
emerged2,3 from the many studies that have been
undertaken.4-15 Despite this, microbiological standards
and recommendations have been drawn up for bathing
waters in Europe and North America.16-21
Previous
studies
have
suffered
from
three
flaws:
those
who
and
bathed
those
(1)
methodological
who did not selected themselves and may have differed in
respect to factors other than the quality of the bathing
water to which they were exposed, (2) the microbiological
quality of water was not assigned to each bather at the
time and place of bathing, and (3) non-water-related risk
factors were not measured or adequately controlled for.
To overcome these problems, and following a suggestion
of the World Health Organization (WHO),22 we have
conducted a randomised controlled exposure study.
Groups of healthy adults were allocated at random to
bathe or not to bathe at UK resorts that met the
mandatory EC standards. The levels of indicator
organisms to which each bather was exposed were
precisely determined. Four such studies were done, and
preliminary results, based on the first two, have been
published.23,24 In this paper we present the dose-response
relation between gastroenteritis and exposure to sea water
of varying microbial quality based on the results of the full
four year programme.

unexposed group (9&middot;7 per 100; p=0&middot;01).
Linear trend and multiple logistic regression techniques
used to establish relations between gastroenteritis
microbiological water quality. Of a range of
microbiological indicators assayed only faecal streptococci
concentration, measured at chest depth, showed a
significant dose-response relation with gastroenteritis.
Adverse health effects were identified when faecal
streptococci concentrations exceeded 32 per 100 mL. This
relation was independent of non-water-related predictors of
were

and

gastroenteritis.
We do not suggest that faecal streptococci caused the
of gastrointestinal symptoms in sea bathers but
these microorganisms do seem to be a better indicator of
water quality than the traditional coliform counts. Bathing
water standards should be revised with these findings in
mind.
excess

Methods

Epidemiological

Centre for Research into Environment and Health,
Leeds Environment Centre, University of Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
(Prof D Kay PhD, F Jones MSc, M D Wyer PhD); Department of Preventive Medicine, State University of New York, Health Sciences Center at Brooklyn, Brooklyn, NY, USA (J M Fleisher PhD); PHLS
Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre (Welsh Unit), Cardiff (R
L Salmon MFPHM); Acer Environmental, Runcorn
(A F Godfree BSc); and Institute of Environmental Medicine,
New York University Medical Centre, New York
(A Zelenauch-Jacquotte MD, R Shore PhD)

Correspondence to: Prof

D

Kay

Four sites around the UK coast that had met EC mandatory
bacteriological criteria for bathing waters18 in the previous
summer were selected by an independent committee. Adult
volunteers (>18 years) were recruited in population centres close
to the study sites in the 3 weeks before the study. Background
rates in previous studies gave our study the power to detect an
increase in illness rate of 5% above background at alpha=0&middot;01
and beta=0&middot;02. The acceptable water quality and minimum age
of volunteers were both requirements defined in ethical clearance
for the studies granted by the Royal College of Physicians
Committee for Research on Healthy Volunteers. The studies
took place at four separate locations on four successive bathing
seasons between 1989-1992 (beaches A-D)
Volunteers attended for an extensive structured personal
enrolment interview and medical examination not more than 2
days before the exposure day. The interview recorded age, sex,
occupation, household size, general health, illness in previous 3
weeks, water contact activities, and other possible confounding
factors associated with gastroenteritis. Those deemed unfit at the

905



Sex

History of migraine headaches
History of stress or anxiety
Frequency of diarrhoea (often/sometimes/ rarely/ never)
Current use of prescription drugs
Illnesses in 4 weeks before study day lasting more than 24 h
Use of prescription drugs in 4 weeks before study day
Consumption of following foods in period from 3 days before to 7 days after trial day
Mayonnaise
Purchased sandwiches
Chicken

Eggs
Hamburgers

(trend) for all classes <0.01, p (trend) exposed classes only <0.01.
Table 3: Gastroenteritis among non-bathers and bathers
exposed to less than 34, 35-69, and greater than 70 faecal
streptococci (per 100 mL) derived from samples taken at
chest depth
p

Hot dogs
Raw milk
Cold meat pies
Seafood
Illness in household within 3 weeks after trial day
Alcohol consumption within 7 day period after trial
Frequency of usual alchol consumption
Taking of laxatives within 4 weeks of trial day
Taking of other stomach remedies within 4 weeks of trial day
Additional bathing within 3 day before and 3 weeks after trial day*
*Included to control for possible confounding due to multiple exposures among
bathers and exposure among non-bathers before or after trial day.

Table 1:

Non-exposure-related

risk factors for

gastroenteritis

examination (eg, serious heart conditions, lifethreatening illness, fear of water; n=16) and those who failed to
attend on the trial day (n=183) were excluded from further
analysis. 23 volunteers who failed to comply with their
randomisation status were also excluded because no water
quality data were available for "non-bathers" who bathed and the
research team could not confirm that "bathers" who claimed to
have stayed on the beach had not entered the water unobserved.
The remaining 1306 volunteers (table 2) were randomised into
bathing and non-bathing groups using a computerised table of
random numbers on the exposure day. Some recruitment was
also undertaken on the trial day itself. Participants recruited on
the trial day were given the initial trial day interviews, examined
by a physician, and randomised to bather or non-bather.
Volunteers were unaware of their group status until they reported
to the beach. The bathing group (exposed) entered a defined and
roped-off 20 m area of water for at least 10 min, completely
immersing their heads at least three times. Their location and
duration of exposure was closely monitored. The non-bathing
(unexposed) group remained in a designated area on the adjacent
beach. Before they left the beach, participants were interviewed
about their current health and dietary habits for the days before
the trial day.
Further extensive interviews inquiring about health, diet, water
contact activity, and other possible non-water-related risk factors
for gastroenteritis in the intervening period were done 1 week
after the trial day. Volunteers were also given medical
examinations. Interviewers were blind to exposure status. 3
weeks subsequent to the trial date participants each received a
final questionnaire by post on which to record any further
symptoms of illness and exposure to bathing water. These delay
periods were chosen to accommodate the incubation periods of
illness often attributed to bathing exposures such as viral
gastroenteritis and cryptosporidiosis. The study was not designed
to pick up longer incubation illness such as hepatitis A.
medical

B=bather, NB=non-bather. *Excluded from further analysis due to missing indicator
organism exposure data or incomplete follow-up. tlncludes 104 participants who

reported gastroenteritis symptoms on
Table 2: Study population

906

exposure

day.

Bacteriological
bathing area was sampled every half-hour over the exposure
period every 20 m and at surf, mid (1 m depth, 30 cm below the
surface) and chest (1-3-1-4 m depth, 30 cm below the surface)
depths. The chest depth was the location at which immersion
exposure took place. Samples were analysed for total and faecal
coliforms, faecal streptococci, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.25
Total staphylococci26,27 were counted at three of the study sites.
All samples were analysed by standard methods and the results
The

were

first known

to

the researchers

at

24-48 h post exposure.

Analytical
The success of randomisation was assessed by comparing the
distribution of non-water-related risk factors for gastroenteritis
among bathers and non-bathers (table 1). This was done by
univariate X2 analysis. If randomisation was successful, the crude
rates of illness for bathers and non-bathers would be adjusted for
any of those extraneous risk factors. If randomisation was not
successful for any non-water-related risk factor, the effect of this
failure was assessed, for any association between illness at
increasing indicator organism exposure, by multiple logistic

regression.
The indicator organism concentrations to which individual
bathers were exposed were assigned from results obtained from
samples at three depths taken at the location of, and during, the
exposure to sea water. Where this was not possible the closest
sample results of the time of the individual exiting the water were
assigned as the measure of exposure. All volunteers (and
interviewers) were "blind" to the water quality attributed to each
bather.
Statistical analyses examined dose-response relationships
between exposure (as measured by microbiological water quality)
and gastroenteritis, whilst controlling for the effects of
confounding factors. Confounding factors included nonexposure-related variables likely to affect the incidence of
gastroenteritis. Gastroenteritis was defined as any case of
vomiting or diarrhoea plus any case of either indigestion or
nausea accompanied by fever reported at either post-exposure
interview. Participants were excluded from the analysis where
they failed to attend for follow-up interviews or where precise
details of the indicator organism density to which the bathers
were exposed could not be determined.
Trends in gastroenteritis rate with indicator organism exposure
measured at the three depths were examined by the MantelHaenszel X2 test for linear trend .21 Exposure classes for total and
faecal coliforms were defined, on the basis of existing standards,
as 0-2400 and greater than 2400 total coliforms per 100 mL
(dL) and 0-200 and greater than 200 faecal coliforms/dL and
0-34, 35-69, and greater than 70 faecal streptococci/dL. Rates of
gastroenteritis amongst the unexposed were thus compared with
rates amongst those exposed to water quality judged to comply
with or to exceed current standards for total coliforms, faecal
coliform, and faecal streptococci.
Since no quantitative standards exist for Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and total staphylococci, median values were used to
define exposure, the classes being 0 and greater than 0
P aeruginosaldL and 0-172 and greater than 172 total
staphylococci/dL. Trend analyses were repeated excluding the
unexposed group. A trend was considered significant if the



Mantel Haenszel XI for linear trend yielded a p value less than
0-05 with and without the inclusion of the unexposed group.
This ensured that the trend statistic was not unduly influenced
by an excessive difference between the gastroenteritis rate in the
unexposed group and that in the lowest exposure class."’2
Trends were also assessed by study site and the differences in
stratum-specific gastroenteritis rates between sites examined to
justify combining the data.
Any significant trends were further analysed by quartiles and
20-unit intervals to define exposure categories. Multiple logistic
regression analysis was then used to examine the details of
significant dose relationships between indicator organism
concentration and gastroenteritis whilst controlling for significant
non-exposure-related risk, or confounding, factors found by
univariate xZ analyses between the exposed and reference groups.
Two independent analyses were conducted with the BMDP" (by
JMF) and MULTLR34 (by RLS) statistical packages. This
provided an independent validation of the results of the BDMP
models which are reported herein and were constructed with
backwards selection procedures to control for confounding
factors.

Results
Table 2 shows numbers of volunteers who came to the
beach on the four trial days, the exclusions due to missing
indicator organism data or incomplete follow-up, the final
cohorts, and the percentages with complete follow-up
information. The median ages of the volunteers before
exclusions were bathers 31-8 years and non-bathers 32-4
years. After exclusions the medians were 31-7 years and
32-1, respectively. The sex balance was 47-4%
males/52-6% females before exclusions and 45-6%/54-4%
afterwards.
Each trial covered a 3 h period. Significant spatial and
temporal variability was observed in indicator organism
concentrations at each site throughout the 3 h period of
sea water sampling during which bathers were exposed.
Crude rates of gastroenteritis were significantly higher
in the exposed group (14-8%) than in the unexposed
group (9-7%) (p=001). A check on non-water-related
risk factors showed randomisation to have been successful
in that no confounding was observed between non-waterrelated factors and the excess risk for bathers at increasing
levels of indicator organism exposure.
34-3% of gastroenteritis cases developed within 7 days
of the study day, the remaining 65-7% had onset dates up
to 21 days. No difference in onset of symptoms was
observed between the exposed and unexposed groups. Of
the five indicator organisms analysed, only increases in
faecal streptococci concentrations derived from samples
taken at chest depth were associated with a trend towards
increased rates of gastroenteritis when the unexposed
(non-bather) group was included or excluded in the trend
analysis (table 3). The exposure categories were then
defined by the quartile points of the faecal streptococci
distribution. This was done to remove any possible

(trend) for all classes <0.001, p (trend) exposed classes only <0.002.
Table 4: Gastroenteritis among non-bathers and bathers
p

exposed in quartile categories of faecal streptococci
(per 100 mL) derived from samples taken at chest depth

p (trend) exposed classes only <0.001.
p (trend) for all classes <0.001,
*Rates significant relative to unexposed (non-bather) group (p<0.05).

Table 5: Gastroenteritis among unexposed individuals vs
bathers exposed to 20 unit categories of faecal streptococci
(per 100 mL) derived from samples taken at chest depth

in the selection of cut-points and to look for
between faecal streptococci exposure and
gastroenteritis at indicator organism density below 35/dL.
Table 4 shows gastroenteritis rates for exposure categories
defined by quartiles of faecal streptococci exposure at
chest depth and provides data on bathers exposed to
concentrations below 35/dL. A significant trend was
observed with or without inclusion of the non-bather

subjectivity

relations

group

(table 4).

Better to delineate the faecal streptococci exposure at
which bathers reported gastroenteritis significantly more
than non-bathers, the data were split into 20 unit intervals
of faecal streptococci exposure (table 5). The increased
risk to the bathers did not start until exposure to 40 or
more faecal streptococci/dL.
Trends in gastroenteritis rate with increasing faecal
streptococci exposure were not significantly different
between sites, indicating that the pooling of data from all
four studies was justified. Furthermore, all volunteers at
all sites were healthy adults who underwent medical
examination and screening before exposure.
Logistic regression analysis (BMDP model) revealed no
confounding of the relation between exposure to faecal
streptococci and illness by the risk factors shown (table
6). Nor was there any significant interaction between
faecal streptococci exposure and any of these non-waterrelated risk factors. Results with the MULTR model were
similar. The lack of interaction between faecal
streptococci exposure and the non-water-related risk
factors shows that the non-water factors are independent
predictors of illness.
The analyses presented thus far suggest that the risk of
gastroenteritis does not increase until bathers are exposed
to about 40 faecal streptococci/dL. To define the
threshold more precisely, we did logistic regression
modelling comparing ill with non-ill bathers as the

*p (trend)=0.009. tcomposite variable of non-water-related risk factors (a), (b), (c),
(g), and (h) (see figure legend). *Modelled continuously m intervals of 10 years.
&sect;Symptoms in family members preceding symptom m individual bathers. Reference
group males.

Table 6:

Logistic regression analysis of gastroenteritis
amongst bathers only
907



Discussion
This is the first time that the methods of a randomised
controlled clinical trial have been applied to an
environmental exposure. The relation between faecal
streptococci concentration measured at chest depth and
gastroenteritis is robust. No other microbiological
indicator at any sampling depth displayed a significant
trend relating concentration to gastroenteritis rate. The
biological basis of this observation is unknown and there
is no suggestion that faecal streptococci was the
aetiological agent involved. However, it would be logical
to presume that whatever causes gastroenteritis copartitions in sea water with faecal streptococci. A
Norwalk-like virus is one possibility. The case definition
of gastroenteritis used gave relative prominence to
upper gastrointestinal
symptoms which frequently
in
of viral gastroenteritis.35 These
outbreaks
predominate
viruses cannot be isolated from surface waters with

techniques.36
of organisms similar to faecal streptococci as
indicators of risk of gastroenteritis has been proposed
current

The

Figure: Probability of gastroenteritis amongst bathers exposed
streptococci densities from samples taken

before.6,20 Nevertheless the increase in rates of illness in
those studies with increasing indicator concentration is
lower than in our study. US Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) studies report lower rates of gastroenteritis,
both in bathing and non-bathing groups, than we found.5,6
We
cannot
explain this
discrepancy though
criticisms
have
been
levelled at EPA type
methodological
studies.13,30 The healthy volunteers in our study may dffer
from the weekend family groups who participated in the
EPA studies. Prospective cohort studies in the UK"

to increasing faecal
at chest depth

Model is adjusted for following significant non-exposure related risk
factors identified between bathers reporting gastroenteritis and those
not reporting gastroenteritis post exposure:
(a) Predisposition to diarrhoea (diarrhoea at least once per month vs
less than twice per year) (site A). (b) Diarrhoea lasting over 24 h within
3 weeks before exposure (all sites). (c) Usual fatigue lasting over 23 h
within 3 weeks before exposure (site B). (d) Gastroenteritis in family
members preceding illness experienced by individual bathers (all sites)
(e) Gender (all sites). (f) Age (10 unit categories) (all sites).
(g) Hamburgers or take-out food consumed within 3 days before and 7
days post exposure (site B). (h) Purchased sandwiches consumed
within 3 days before and 7 days post exposure (site A).
From equaton (see Results) a value of 32 per 100 mL on x axis for
faecal streptococcal density is the approximate density at which
predicted probability of gastroenteritis equals observed proportion of
non-bathers reporting gastroenteritis (ie, y, the excess, is zero).

outcome variable with faecal streptococci density as a
continuous variable. Since all previous models had
indicated no excess risk among bathers exposed to 20-39
faecal streptococci/dL, the median faecal streptococci
density to which bathers were exposed within this
exposure grouping was chosen as the cut-point on which
to conduct separate logistic regression analysis-ie,
separate logistic models were computed for bathers
exposed to less than 32 and more than 32 faecal
streptococci/dL. Because the faecal streptococci density
was
a
continuous variable here, a square-root
transformation was necessary to ensure linearity.
The model for bathers exposed to less than 32 faecal
streptococci/dL was not significant (likelihood ratio
=0-67, p=041) but for bathers exposed to more than
32 faecal streptococci/dL there was a significant result
(6-33, p=002), as follows:

Logn

odds (of

gastroententis)=O’20102B{FS-32)-2-3561

then used to calculate the probability of
gastroenteritis symptoms with increased faecal
streptococci exposure (figure 1). The model predicts a
probability of illness of 0-0866 at 32 faecal
streptococci/dL and 0-1039 at 33/dL. When compared
with the observed rate of gastroenteritis symptoms among
non-bathers (0-0975) the model does provide strong
evidence that 33 faecal streptococci/100 mL is the
threshold of increased risk.
This model

908

was

use

confirm the generally higher rates of gastroenteritis
observed in UK investigations than in EPA studies.5
Our findings are not applicable to younger bathers or
special interest groups such as surfers, sailboarders, and
divers; nor can they be extrapolated to freshwater
recreation sites. They do show that existing EC
standards" have very little public health significance to
coastal bathing waters in temperate north-west Europe.
Indeed coliforms seem to have little value as indicators of
the risks of gastroenteritis from sewage pollution of
coastal waters. Faecal streptococci concentrations are a
better microbiological indicator of whether sea water is fit
for bathing in and should replace coliform concentrations
as the basis for official standards. Some movement in this
direction is evident in proposed amendments to EC
bathing water standards.21 Information on faecal
streptococci concentrations, resort-by-resort and day-byday, may have an important role in helping people decide
whether to bathe or not
This UK research was funded by the Department of the Environment, the
Department of Health, the National Rivers Authority and the Welsh
Office. We thank Dr E B Pike and colleagues (Water Research Centre),
Mr H Jones (Department of Environment), Dr A Dawson (Department of
Health), Mr D Lowthion (National Rivers Authority), Dr H Prosser
(Welsh Office), Dr R Stanwell-Smith and colleagues (Communicable
Diseases Surveillance Centre, Colindale) for their guidance and advice;
the environmental health officers, scientists, medical teams, district
council officers, National Rivers Authority officers and volunteers at each
of our study locations. We are indebted to the local authorities of Swansea,
Wirral, Portsmouth and Southend where our studies took place.

References
1

Walker A.
242-45.

Swimming-the hazards of taking

2

Jones J, Kay D, Stanwell-Smith R, Wyer MD. An appraisal of the
potential health impacts of sewage disposal to UK coastal waters. J Inst
Water Environ Management 1990; 4: 295-303.

a

dip. BMJ 1992; 304:



3

4

Kay D, Wyer MD. Recent epidemiological studies. In: Kay D, ed.
Recreational water quality management, vol I: coastal waters.
Chichester: Ellis Horwood, 1992: 129-56.
Stevenson AH. Studies of bathing water quality and health. Am J Public
Health 1953; 43: 529-38.

5 Cabelli VJ, Dufour AP, McCabe

LJ, Levin MA. Swimming associated

gastroenteritis and water quality. Am J Epidemiol 1982;

115: 606-16.

6 Cabelli VJ, Dufour AP, McCabe LJ, Levin MA. A marine recreational
water quality criterion consistent with indicator concepts and risk
analysis. J Water Pollut Control Fed 1983; 55: 1306-14.
7 El Sharkawi F, Hassan MNER. The relation between the state of

pollution in Alexandria swimming beaches and the occurrence of
typhoid among bathers. Bull High Inst Publ Health Alexandria 1982;

12:

8 Foulon G, Martin J,

Quoi NN, Martin-Bouyer G. Etude de la
morbidit&eacute; humaine en relation avec la pollution bacteriologique des
eaux de baignade en mer: &eacute;tude preliminaire. Sciences 1983; 2: 127-43.
9 Seyfned PL, Tobin R, Brown NE, Ness PF. A prospective study of
swimming related illness I: swimming associated health risk. Am J
Public Health 1985; 75: 1068-70.
10 Seyfried PL, Tobin R, Brown NE, Ness PF. A prospective study of
swimming related illness. II. Morbidity and the microbiological quality
of water. Am J Public Health 1985; 75: 1071-75.
11 Fattal B, Peleg-Olevsky T, Agurshy T, Shuval HI. The association
between sea-water pollution as measured by bacterial indicators and
morbidity of bathers at Mediterranean beaches in Israel. Chemosphere
1986; 16: 565-70.
12 Cheung WHS, Kleevens JWL, Chang K, Jung RPS. Health effects of
beach water pollution in

Hong Kong. Proc Inst Water Environ
Management 1988; Brighton, 378-83.
13 Lightfoot NE. A prospective study of swimming related illness at six
freshwater beaches in southern Ontario. PhD thesis, University of
Toronto, 1989.
14 Balarajan R, Soni Raleigh V, Yuen P, Wheeler D, Machin D,
Cartwright R. Health risks associated with bathing in sea water. BMJ
1991; 303: 1444-45.
15 Alexander LM, Heaven A, Tennant A, Morris R. Symptomatology of
contact

with

seawater

contaminated with sewage.

J Epidemiol Community Health 1992; 46: 340-43.
16 Anon. Sewage contamination of bathing beaches in England and
Wales. (Med Res Coun Memo no 37). London: Medical Research
Council, 1959.
17 Anon. Water quality criteria: report from National Technical Advisory
Committee. Washington, DC: Federal Water Pollution Control
Administration/Department of the Interior, 1968.
18 Anon. EEC Council directive of 8 December 1975 concerning the
quality of bathing water (76/160/EEC). Offic J Eur Commun 1976;
L/31: 1-7.
19 US Environmental Protection Agency.

Quality criteria for water.

and Standards Division,
1976.
20 US Environmental Protection Agency. Ambient water quality criteria
for bacteria (EPA440/5-84-002). Washington, DC: Office of Water
Regulations and Standards Division, 1986.
21 Commission of the European Communities. Proposal for a Council
directive concerning the quality of bathing waters: COM(94)

94/0006(SYN) (ISBN 92-77-65137-7).
22 Anon. Health criteria for the quality of recreational waters with special
reference to coastal waters and beaches. Copenhagen: WHO, 1972.

Jones F, Kay D, Stanwell-Smith R, Wyer MD. Results of the first pilot
scale controlled cohort epidemiological investigation into the possible
health effects of bathing in sea water at Langland Bay. J Inst Water
Environ Management 1991; 5: 91-97.
24 Fleisher JM, Jones F, Kay D, Stanwell-Smith R, Wyer MD, Morano R.
23

337-51.

children in

Washington, DC: Office of Water Regulations

Water and non-water related risk factors for gastroenteritis among
bathers exposed to sewage contaminated marine waters. Int J Epidemiol

1993; 22: 698-708.
25 Anon. The bacteriological examination of drinking water supplies (Rep
Public Health Med Subj no 71). London: HM Stationery Office, 1983.
26 Alico RK, Dragonjac MF. Evaluation of media for recovery of
Staphylococcus aureus from swimming pools. Appl Environ Microbiol

1986; 51: 699-702.
27
28

Stengren SR, Starzyk MJ. Modified medium for recovery of
Staphylococcus aureus from water. Microbios 1984; 41: 191-203.
SAS Institute. Users guide: statistics, version 5 edition. Cary: SAS
Institute, 1985.

29 Anon. Beach and harbor sampling program. New York: New York
Department of Health, 1980.
30 Fleisher JM. A re-analysis of data supporting the US Federal
bacteriological water quality criteria governing marine recreational
waters. J Water Pollut Control Fed 1991; 63: 259-64.

City

31 Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research: vol I,
analysis of case control studies. Lyon: International Agency for
Research on Cancer, 1980.
32 Maclure M, Greenland S. Tests for trend and dose response
misinterpretations and alternatives. Am J Epidemiol 1992; 135: 92-104.
33 Dixon WJ. BMDP statistical software manual: vol 2. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1988.
34 Nelson Campos-Filho BS, Franco EL. MULTLR: a microcomputer
program for multiple logistic regression by unconditional and
conditional maximum likelihood methods. S&atilde;o Paulo: Ludwig Institute
for Cancer Research, 1988.
35 Kaplan JE, Feldman R, Campbell DS, Lookabaugh C, Gary GW. The
frequency of a Norwalk like pattern of illness in outbreaks of acute
gastroenteritis. Am J Public Health 1982; 72: 1329-32.
36 Lambden PR, Caul EO, Ashley CR, Clarke IN. Sequence and genome
organization of a human small round structured (Norwalk-like) virus.
Science 1993; 259: 516-18.

909

