DNA AND CELL BIOLOGY
Volume 29, Number 9, 2010
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Pp. 509–517
DOI: 10.1089=dna.2009.0988

Degraded Water Quality Influences
Microbial Community Composition and Perception
of Health Risks in the Chattooga River
Angela D. Kent1 and Zachary L. Bayne 2

Bacterial skin infections are a chronic problem among whitewater rafters on the Chattooga River in the
southeastern United States; however, little is known about the source of such infections. The Chattooga River is a
federally designated ‘‘Wild and Scenic’’ river, with a forested riparian buffer zone designed to protect water
quality in the river. Riverine water quality can be negatively impacted by tributaries that are not protected by
federal guidelines. Water quality in Stekoa Creek, a major tributary of the Chattooga River, is degraded by
sediment that runs off from construction sites near the creek, as well as fecal coliform contamination from
wastewater treatment facilities. Degraded water quality may impact the health of visitors recreating on the river,
as well as recreation industry workers. We demonstrate that inputs from the impaired creek influence microbial
community composition in Chattooga River waters. A survey of whitewater raft guides was conducted to collect
data on incidence of skin infection, and to assess perceived health risk from recreation activities. Whitewater
rafting guides working on the Chattooga River reported concerns about their personal health related to degraded water quality and microbial contamination from Stekoa Creek. Incidence of bacterial skin infection and
perceived health risk was strongly correlated among the whitewater rafting guides (r ¼ 0.67). Concerns about
environmental quality appear to be shaped by the incidence of skin infection. Such concerns are also correlated
with changes in recreation practices among whitewater rafting guides (r ¼ 0.67).

Introduction

T

he Chattooga River in the southern Appalachian
Mountains of NE Georgia, NW South Carolina, and SW
North Carolina is a federally designated ‘‘Wild and Scenic
River’’ (Fig. 1). The Chattooga Watershed contains some of
the most scenic and valuable water resources in the region.
This resource supports a large recreation industry that attracts 100,000 visitors each year participating in whitewater
kayaking, rafting, canoeing, tubing, and fishing, as well as
swimming and camping activities. Although the river’s Wild
and Scenic status protects the river proper, as well as a riparian buffer zone of a quarter-mile on either side, the water
quality in this river can be negatively impacted by tributaries
that are not protected by federal guidelines. Stekoa Creek is
a major tributary to the Chattooga River that flows through
the city of Clayton, GA. Water quality in Stekoa Creek is
degraded by sediment that runs off from construction sites
near the creek, as well as bacterial contamination from the
wastewater treatment facilities in Clayton (Chattooga Conservancy, 2005, 2007a). Elevated fecal coliform counts are
consistently observed in this stream, and this tributary has

been listed on the state of Georgia’s list of impaired waterways for more than a decade. Degraded water quality in
Stekoa Creek may impact the health of visitors recreating on
the Chattooga River, as well as recreation industry workers
(e.g., whitewater raft guides). Staphylococcus skin infections
are a common occurrence among river rafting guides
(Decker et al., 1986), and water pollution may be the source
of such infections (Scott et al., 2002; Dwight et al., 2004).
Anecdotal evidence from Chattooga River guides suggests
that whitewater raft guides are more likely to develop bacterial skin infections if they work and recreate downstream
of Stekoa Creek.
The current study employed molecular microbial ecology
methods to examine the microbial communities present in
Stekoa Creek and in popular recreation areas in the Chattooga River (upstream and downstream of the confluence
with Stekoa Creek), with particular attention to changes in
the river microbial community assemblages below Stekoa
Creek. This work addressed the hypothesis that inputs from
Stekoa Creek significantly influence microbial community
composition in the Chattooga River. A limited number of
studies have examined microbial communities in riverine

1
Deparment of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences and 2Environmental Fellows Program, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, Illinois.

509



510

KENT AND BAYNE

FIG. 1. Chattooga River basin, including the Chattooga River and major tributaries. Sample collection sites are indicated
along the Chattooga River (sites R1–R7), and in Stekoa Creek near Clayton, GA (sites C1 and C2). Adapted from the U.S.
Forest Service Land and Resource Management Plan for the Chattahoochee (GA), Sumter (SC), and Nantahala (NC) National
Forests.
systems, but inputs from tributaries (particularly those significantly impacted by anthropogenic influences) have previously been demonstrated to significantly impact the
composition of microbial assemblages in rivers (Crump and
Hobbie, 2005; Clinton and Vose, 2006; Winter et al., 2007).
This study explores the impact of inputs from an impaired
tributary on the relatively pristine waters of the Chattooga
River.
Data were also collected on the incidence of bacterial skin
infections among whitewater raft guides, and correlated with
environmental concerns and recreation activities on the
Chattooga River. An additional objective of this work was to
determine if experience with skin infection has influenced
perceptions of environmental quality among frequent users
of this recreation area. A final aim of this research was to
explore the impact of water quality issues on perceptions of
risk and changes in recreation activities of rafting guides.

Materials and Methods
Site description
The Chattooga River watershed contains large blocks of
protected lands including old-growth forest and mature
secondary growth forest. The river proper is buffered by the
Chattooga Wild and Scenic River Corridor, which protects a
quarter- to half-mile of zone of riparian forest habitat on each
side of the river from disturbance and anthropogenic impacts
(Chattooga River Watershed Coalition, 1997) (Fig. 1). In addition, 70% of the watershed is comprised of protected lands
managed by three national forest ranger districts: the Highlands District of the Nantahala National Forest (NC), the
Andrew Pickens District of the Sumter National Forest (SC),
and the Tallulah District of the Chattahoochee National
Forest (GA). In contrast, Stekoa Creek flows through privately owned land near Clayton, GA (Pruitt et al., 2001;



MICROBIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION IN THE CHATTOOGA RIVER
Riedel and Vose, 2002). Urban development, deforestation,
invasive species, sedimentation, and land use changes have
impacted the water quality in Stekoa Creek (Chattooga River
Watershed Coalition, 1997; Pruitt et al., 2001; Chattooga
Conservancy, 2007a).
Water collection
Two-liter surface grab samples were collected at various
points along sections II–IV of the Chattooga River, and in
Stekoa Creek (Fig. 1). Samples were collected four times
throughout the summer, on May 16, June 23, July 10, and
August 17, 2007. Sample locations are indicated in Figure 1.
Chattooga River sample collection sites were classified as
‘‘upstream’’ or ‘‘downstream’’ in relation to Stekoa Creek.
Bacterial community analysis
Bacteria present in these samples were concentrated onto
0.2-mm filters (Supor-200; Pall Corp., Port Washington, NY).
Filters were frozen immediately, and stored frozen awaiting
DNA extraction using the FastPrep DNA purification kit
(MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Bacterial community composition and diversity was assessed using automated ribosomal
intergenic spacer analysis (ARISA) (Fisher and Triplett,
1999), as described in previous studies (Kent et al., 2004;
Yannarell and Triplett, 2005; Kent et al., 2007). The ARISA
method uses polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify the
internal transcribed spacer region of the bacterial rRNA operon. Different lengths of this intergenic spacer region are
diagnostic of different bacterial populations, and can be used
to develop a DNA fingerprint of the microbial community
that is analogous to a census of microbial populations.
ARISA PCR reactions included buffer consisting of 50 mM
Tris (pH 8.0), 250 mg of bovine serum albumin per mL and
3.0 mM MgCl2 (Idaho Technology, Salt Lake City, UT; cat
#1770), 250 mM of each dNTP, 10 pmol of each primer, 1.25 U
of Taq polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI), and 1 mL of
extracted DNA in a final volume of 25 mL. The bacterial internal transcribed spacer region was amplified using the
following primers: 1406f, 50 TGYACACACCGCCCGT 30
(universal, 16S rRNA gene), and 23Sr, 50 GGGTTBCCC
CATTCRG 30 (bacteria-specific, 23S rRNA gene). The 1406f
primer was labeled at the 50 end with the phosphoramidite
dye 6-FAM. PCR was carried out in an Eppendorf MasterCycler Gradient (Eppendorf, Hauppauge, NY) with an
initial denaturation at 948C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles
of 948C for 35 s, 558C for 45 s, and 728C for 2 min, with a final
extension carried out at 728C for 2 min. Lengths of ARISA
PCR products from each sample were determine by denaturing capillary electrophoresis using an ABI 3730xl Genetic
Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) at the UIUC
Biotechnology Center W.M. Keck Center for Comparative
and Functional Genomics. A custom 100- to 2000-bp Rhodamine X-labeled size standard (Bioventures, Murfreesboro,
TN) was used as the internal size standard for each sample.
Size-calling was carried out using GeneMarker version 1.6
(SoftGenetics, State College, PA). Capillary electrophoresis
results in minor run-to-run variations in observed versus
actual fragment length that were resolved using the allelecalling features in GeneMarker before statistical analysis. To
include the maximum number of peaks while excluding
background fluorescence, a threshold of 100 fluorescence

511

units was used. The signal strength (i.e., peak area) of each
peak was normalized to account for run-to-run variations in
signal detection by dividing the area of individual peaks by
the total fluorescence (area) detected in each profile, expressing each peak as a proportion of the observed community (Rees et al., 2004, Yannarell and Triplett, 2005). These
community fingerprints can be used to assess changes in the
microbial assemblages community observed in Stekoa Creek.
Data on water quality indicators (fecal coliforms) were
available from the Chattooga Conservancy for the study
period (Chattooga Conservancy, 2007a).
Sequence analysis
Clone libraries were constructed from Chattooga River
and Stekoa Creek water samples. Briefly, the 16S rRNA gene
was amplified from environmental DNA samples using
primers 8F, 50 -AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-30 , and 1492R,
50 -GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT-30 . PCR products were
cloned into the pGEM-T vector following the manufacturer’s
instructions (Promega; cat. #A1380). Cloned plasmid inserts
were amplified directly from cells as described (Vergin et al.,
2001) using M13 vector-specific primers. DNA sequencing of
the cloned 16S rRNA genes was performed by the W.M.
Keck Center for Functional Genomics at the University of Illinois using the ABI Prism BigDye terminator sequencing kit
(Applied Biosystems) and the 1492R primer. A total of 80
sequences were obtained from sites representing the major
groups of samples based on Bray–Curtis similarity: sites R1
(40 sequences), C1 (18 sequences), and R6 (22 sequences).
Phylogenetic affiliations were assigned for each DNA sequence using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) Classifier (http:==rdp.cme.msu.edu=classifier=classifier.jsp). All 16S
rRNA gene sequences generated in the current study have
been submitted to GenBank under accession numbers
GU247815 to GU247894.
Survey of recreation workers
Whitewater rafting guides on the Chattooga River were
asked to respond to an anonymous survey (Table 1) to determine the frequency of skin infections related to their
whitewater rafting activities. To correlate skin infection data
with exposure to the lower (contaminated) reaches of the
Chattooga River, data were also collected about the survey
participants’ recreational activities on the Chattooga River
(as part of their employment, and personal recreation activities), and about their perceptions of environmental quality
issues related to the Chattooga River. The mode of the survey was a self-response questionnaire (Table 1). Responses
were collected from 14 participants out of a total of 35 guides
working for the Nantahala Outdoor Center in Bryson
City, NC. Survey procedures were reviewed by the University of Illinois Institutional Review Board, and this study
was exempted from further review (IRB protocol number
07744).
Data analysis
To compare bacterial community composition among
samples, the Bray–Curtis similarity coefficient (Legendre
and Legendre, 1998) was calculated among all sample pairs
based on the ARISA data generated from each sample. A similarity matrix was generated for all possible pairs of samples.



512

KENT AND BAYNE
Table 1. Survey Questions Presented to Chattooga River Whitewater Rafting Guides

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

How long have you been guiding on the Chattooga River?
Which section(s) of the Chattooga River do you guide on?
How often do you guide on section 4 of the Chattooga River?
When guiding, how often do you become submerged in the water?
Do you raft=boat in section 4 of the Chattooga River for your own recreation?
How many times per week do you raft=boat in section 4 for personal recreation?
Have you developed Staphylococcus (‘‘staph’’) skin infections in previous years?
Have you developed any Staphylococcus (‘‘staph’’) skin infections this summer?
Approximately how many times this summer did you experience skin infections?
In which months (summer 2007) did you experience skin infections? (circle all that apply)
On a scale of 1–5, how concerned are you about water quality on the Chattooga River?
Have concerns about water quality in the Chattooga River altered your recreation habits?
Do you avoid rafting or boating on some sections of the Chattooga River because of water quality concerns?
On a scale of 1–5, how concerned are you about your personal health when rafting or boating on the Chattooga
River?
15. On a scale of 1–5, how concerned are you about the health of your clients when rafting or boating on the Chattooga
River?
16. Have concerns about skin infections altered your work habits in the Chattooga River?
17. Do you avoid guiding on some sections of the Chattooga River because of concerns about skin infections?
Questions 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, and 16 were yes=no questions. All other questions used a Likert scale of response options (1–5).

This similarity matrix was used to generate nonmetric multidimensional scaling (MDS) ordinations to observe patterns
of similarity between samples, and significance of these
patterns were tested using the analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) statistics (Clarke and Green, 1988). ANOSIM is a statistical procedure that tests whether communities in different
a priori sample groups are significantly different in composition. ANOSIM generates a test statistic, R. The magnitude
of R indicates the degree of separation between groups of
samples, with a score of 1 indicating complete separation
(two groups of samples are completely dissimilar) and 0
indicating no separation. Calculation of similarity coefficients
and ANOSIM analyses were carried out using PRIMER 6 for
Windows (PRIMER-E, Plymouth, United Kingdom).
Survey response data were also analyzed using nonmetric
MDS. Similarity in survey participant responses to questions
about environmental quality (Table 1, questions 11–15) were
assessed using the Manhattan distance metric (Legendre and
Legendre, 1998). The resulting similarity matrix was used to
ordinate the survey participants in ‘‘environmental concern
space’’ (defined by survey questions 11–15). In this multidimensional ordination space, survey participants with a similar suite of attitudes about environmental quality will plot
close together. Patterns of similarity in participants’ perceptions of environmental quality were compared to (1) incidence of Staphylococcus skin infection, (2) concerns about the
health of whitewater guides and rafters due to water quality,
and (3) shifts in work and recreation habits due to concerns
about degraded water quality.
Correlations between individual survey elements were
explored using Pearson’s correlations. Calculation of Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficients was carried out using Microsoft Excel.
Results
Microbial community composition
Microbial communities varied among the sample locations
in the Chattooga River and Stekoa Creek (Fig. 2). Stekoa

Creek microbial communities were consistently different
from microbial assemblages observed in the Chattooga River
(ANOSIM R ¼ 0.616, p ¼ 0.001). Longitudinal variability in
microbial community composition was observed across our
sample locations in the Chattooga River on each sample date,
but in general, microbial communities observed throughout the length of sections II–IV (46 km) were quite similar.
The only exception was station R6, directly downstream of
the confluence of Stekoa Creek and the Chattooga River.
Microbial community composition at this station was

FIG. 2. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (MDS) analysis comparing microbial community composition in water
samples collected from the Chattooga River and Stekoa
Creek in summer 2007. Sample locations along the river and
creek are indicated in Fig. 1. ‘‘Upstream’’ sites refer to locations R1–R4, ‘‘downstream’’ refers to site R6, ‘‘confluence’’
refers to site R5 at the confluence of Stekoa Creek with the
Chattooga River, and ‘‘creek’’ refers to samples collected at
sites C1 and C2. Each point represents the microbial assemblage present in a water sample characterized by automated ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis. Samples with
similar microbial assemblages plot close together. Stress
represents the agreement between the ordination and pairwise Bray–Curtis similarity coefficients between all samples.



MICROBIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION IN THE CHATTOOGA RIVER
consistently different from the other river samples (R1–R5, R7)
(Fig. 2), except in August. During other times, station R6
appeared to be intermediate in composition between the Stekoa
Creek and Chattooga River microbial communities, indicating
that inputs from the creek altered microbial community assemblages in the river. Interestingly, microbial community
composition at the inlet to Lake Tugalo (R7) is generally
similar to upstream reaches of the Chattooga River, suggesting that the influence of inputs from Stekoa Creek have been
diluted out by the greater volume of the Chattooga River.
Sequence analysis of 16S rRNA clones generated from
representative samples collected upstream (Fig. 1, R1), and
downstream (R6) of Stekoa Creek, and in Stekoa Creek (C1)
confirms the differences in microbial assemblages in the river
and creek (Table 2). Phylum and subphylum assignments reported in Table 2 were generated at a 99–100%
confidence level by the RDP Classifier. Sequences assigned
to the Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes phyla dominated
clones recovered from river waters (R1 and R6), with bproteobacteria assignments comprising a smaller portion of
the sequences. A greater diversity of taxa were represented
in sequences generated from Stekoa Creek microbial communities, despite a lower cloning effort. In particular, sequences representing a greater diversity of Proteobacteria
groups were recovered from Stekoa Creek waters, including
Alphaproteobacteria sequences representing the genus
Sphingobium, and d-proteobacteria sequences affiliated with
the family Desulfuromonaceae.
Water quality concerns and recreation activity
Data were collected on the incidence of skin infections
among whitewater rafting guides working on the Chattooga
River. The anonymous survey also collected data about
perceptions of environmental quality among these recreation
workers, allowing us to examine the influence of water
quality issues on the health and behavior of recreation
workers. Nonmetric MDS analysis was used to ordinate the
responses of recreation workers to questions about environmental quality (Table 1, questions 11–15). This allows
comparison of environmental quality perceptions among
rafting guides in a multidimensional ‘‘environmental concern’’ space and assess the extent to which patterns in their
perceptions may have been influenced by incidence of skin
infection. We can also use this approach to look for relationships between environmental attitudes and changes in
recreation behavior and concerns about their personal health
or the health of their clients.
Nonmetric MDS analysis of responses to survey questions
11–15 indicates a range of attitudes toward environmental

513

quality among the 14 whitewater rafting guides who responded to the survey. Guides who have experienced skin
infections tend to have similar responses to questions about
their perceptions of water quality in the Chattooga River
(Fig. 3). ANOSIM R ¼ 0.27 ( p ¼ 0.013) for comparisons among
recreation workers based on incidence of skin infections.
Frequency of skin infections (Table 1, question 9) is correlated with concerns about personal health when rafting
(Table 1, question 14) (r ¼ 0.67).
Survey responses indicated a correlation between incidence of skin infection (Fig. 3) and changes in work and
recreation habits (r ¼ 0.67). Respondents reporting alterations
in work and recreation practices in response to concerns
about water quality shared similar perceptions of environmental quality (Fig. 4). ANOSIM R ¼ 0.40 ( p ¼ 0.024) for
comparison of environmental concerns among guides based
on altered work and=or recreation behavior.
Concerns about environmental quality (Table 1, question
11) were correlated with concern for personal health among
the recreation workers (Table 1, question 14) (r ¼ 0.64). The
level of concern about health of guides and their clients was
overlaid on the MDS ordination of the guides in environmental attitude space (Fig. 5), indicating that guides who are
concerned about the health of rafters tend to have similar
perceptions of environmental quality issues in the Chattooga
River. This group of guides most strongly concerned about
health of rafters includes worker who have not experienced
skin infections (Figs. 3 and 5).
Discussion
Microbial community composition
in the Chattooga River
Microbial community composition in the lower 46 km of
the Chattooga River (sections II–IV) was similar throughout
the surveyed reaches. Similarity in microbial community
structure did not appear to be a function of distance. The
microbial communities observed in Stekoa Creek were distinctly different at each time point, and for each sampling
event, the microbial communities surveyed in this study
could be divided into distinct river and creek assemblages, or
a mixture of the two (Fig. 2). Previous studies of microbial
community composition in rivers have noted gradual sequential longitudinal shifts in microbial community structure
(Crump et al., 1999; Winter et al., 2007); however, these
studies were examining shifts in microbial community
structure on a larger spatial scale (2581 km) or strong salinity
gradients. The similarity in microbial community composition along the surveyed reaches of the Chattooga River may

Table 2. Percent of Sequences Affiliated with Each Phylum Are Displayed for Each Water Sample

Actinobacteria
Bacteriodetes
b-proteobacteria
d-proteobacteria
a-proteobacteria

Chattooga River upstream (R1)

Chattooga River downstream (R6)

Stekoa Creek (C1)

57.5
35.0
7.5
0.0
0.0

59.1
22.7
18.2
0.0
0.0

33.3
22.2
33.3
5.6
5.6

Subphyla are displayed for the Proteobacteria. Phylum and subphylum assignments reported in Table 2 were generated at a 99–100%
confidence level by the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) Classifier.



514

FIG. 3. Nonmetric MDS analysis comparing the survey
responses of whitewater rafting guides. Each point represents a survey respondent and his=her range of responses to
questions about environmental quality (Table 1, questions
11–15). Guides with a similar suite of perceptions and concerns about environmental quality plot closer together. Stress
represents the agreement between the ordination and pairwise Manhattan distance coefficients based on survey responses. Shaded circles represent respondents who indicated
that they had developed a skin infection (question 8). Bubble
diameter indicates occurrences of skin infection based on
responses to survey question 9 (white circles represent respondents who reported no skin infections).
be due to the small study area (relative to previous studies),
or to the lack of strong environmental gradients.
Differences between the microbial communities in the
Chattooga River and Stekoa Creek may reflect the cumulative influences of different ecological drivers present in the

KENT AND BAYNE

FIG. 5. Nonmetric MDS analysis comparing the survey
responses of whitewater rafting guides. Each point represents a survey respondent and their range of responses to
questions about environmental quality (questions 11–15).
Guides with a similar suite of attitudes toward environmental quality plot closer together. Stress represents the
agreement between the ordination and pairwise Manhattan
distance coefficients based on survey responses. Bubble diameter indicates level of concern about health of rafters due
to water quality based on responses to survey question 15.

watershed. Distinctly different land uses surround each
waterway, and these land use patterns impact the chemical
and physical parameters of the water. Aquatic microbial
communities in numerous other systems have been shown to
respond directly and indirectly to such factors (Crump and
Hobbie, 2005; Kent et al., 2007, Shade et al., 2007; Winter et al.,
2007), and the significant differences in microbial communities observed in these waterways are likely due to chemical
and physical differences related to different land uses in the
riparian areas. Previous studies in the headwaters of the
Chattooga River watershed have documented differences in
microbial indicators correlated with urban development
(Clinton and Vose, 2006). Shifts in microbial community
composition have been related to spatial or temporal variation in nutrient inputs in other river systems (Crump and
Hobbie, 2005; Winter et al., 2007).
Impact of impaired tributary

FIG. 4. Nonmetric MDS analysis comparing the survey
responses of whitewater rafting guides. Each point represents a survey respondent and their range of responses to
questions about environmental quality (Table 1, questions
11–15). Guides with a similar suite of attitudes toward environmental quality plot closer together. Stress represents the
agreement between the ordination and pairwise Manhattan
distance coefficients based on survey responses. Respondents are coded based on alteration of work and recreation habits in response to concerns about water quality
(questions 12 and 16). Shaded circles represent respondents
who indicated that they have changed their work and recreation habits due to concerns about water quality.

Allochthonous inputs impact the water quality of Stekoa
Creek. Sediment loading resulting from land use change in
and around Clayton, GA, results in elevated turbidity in the
creek (Pruitt et al., 2001; Riedel and Vose, 2002; Chattooga
Conservancy, 2007a). This sediment is exported from Stekoa
Creek, and decreases water quality in the Chattooga River at
the confluence of the river and stream. Inputs from the creek
alter the microbial community composition in the river as
well (Fig. 2). The microbial communities observed at the
confluence were intermediate in similarity between distinct
assemblages observed in the Chattooga River and Stekoa
Creek, suggesting that the populations at site R6 represent a
mixture of river and creek microbial communities. Sedimentassociated microbial populations from the creek may be responsible for the shift in similarity of river microbial
assemblages at site R6 (Fig. 2). Particle-associated microbial



MICROBIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION IN THE CHATTOOGA RIVER
populations have been observed to strongly influence microbial community composition in other riverine ecosystems
(Crump et al., 1999). b-proteobacteria have previously
been shown to dominate particle-associated bacterial communities (Lemarchand et al., 2006). A higher percentage of
b-proteobacteria sequences were obtained from sedimentladen Stekoa Creek waters compared with the river
samples (Table 2), suggesting that particle-associated bproteobacteria may be an important component of this system as well. Clone library data also indicated the presence of
a-proteobacteria in Stekoa Creek (Table 2). a-proteobacteria
are not typical freshwater microbial populations, and are
more commonly found in soil habitats or marine systems
(Yannarell and Kent, 2009). The a-proteobacteria sequences
detected in the clone libraries were assigned to the genus
Sphingobium, a genus typically found in soils but not aquatic
systems (Takeuchi et al., 2001). Thus, the presence of Sphingobium in the water samples further support the conclusion
that sediment inputs impair Stekoa Creek.
In addition to sediment loading, water quality data
available from the Chattooga Conservancy reported highly
elevated fecal coliform counts in Stekoa Creek during the
study period (Chattooga Conservancy, 2007a). Coliform
counts in excess of 200 cells per 100 mL of water are recognized by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as a
health hazard in ‘‘primary contact waters’’ used for recreation. Coliform counts in excess of 800 cells per 100 mL of
stream water are frequently observed at various points in
Stekoa Creek (Chattooga Conservancy, 2007a). The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency ranks bacterial contamination as one of the most serious pollution issues in rivers
(US EPA, 2009). Sources of fecal coliform contamination can
be challenging to identify, but conservation groups monitoring Stekoa Creek have identified several leaks in the sewer
system of Clayton, GA, that contribute to the degraded water
quality observed in Stekoa Creek (Chattooga Conservancy,
2005). Human health risks resulting from fecal coliform
contamination are greatest when the contamination is primarily from human sources (Cabelli et al., 1982; Scott et al.,
2002; Dwight et al., 2004). Staphylococcus skin infections are
common among swimmers and rafters (Charoenca and
Fujioka, 1995; Colburn, 2003) but no diagnostic data were
available to identify the bacteria responsible for skin infections among Chattooga whitewater raft guides. Molecular
detection methods for Staphylococcus are not generally sensitive enough to detect the pathogen from dilute environmental samples (Fukushima et al., 2003); low sensitivity of
published PCR detection methods was confirmed in the
current study by failure to amplify low concentrations of
serially diluted Staphylococcus aureus DNA in DNA extracted
from river samples (data not shown). However, it is possible
to explore the hypothesis that community composition in the
Chattooga River is altered by inputs from Stekoa Creek.
Analysis of microbial community using ARISA indicates that
waters from contaminated Stekoa Creek do significantly shift
the microbial community in the Chattooga River (Fig. 2).
Although the causal agent of skin infections experienced by
whitewater raft guides is unknown, repeated exposure to
contaminated waters increases the potential for skin infections (Shanks et al., 2007; Yoder et al., 2008). Bacterial contamination may represent a health hazard for rafters in
Stekoa Creek and in the Chattooga River.

515

The influence of Stekoa Creek on microbial community
composition in the Chattooga River is most apparent at the
confluence (R6). Microbial communities in the downstream
reach of the river (R7) are generally similar in composition to
those observed in upstream reaches (R1–R5), indicating little
influence of Stekoa Creek waters at most time points (Fig. 2).
Microbial community composition at station R7 was more
similar to Stekoa Creek assemblages on one sample date
(Fig. 2), suggesting that the relative influence of Stekoa Creek
inputs varies over time. Previous studies in this watershed
and others have noted that dilution and in-stream processing
have the potential to moderate the influence of tributaries on
water chemistry and other water quality parameters (Clinton
and Vose, 2006; Winter et al., 2007). Studies in the Danube
River have demonstrated that the influence of tributaries on
microbial community composition was most easily detected
just downstream of the confluence, but less noticeable further
downstream due to the effect of dilution. During periods of
low flow in August, there is no noticeable influence of the
Stekoa Creek microbial communities on the microbial community composition observed at the confluence (R6). If the
impact of Stekoa Creek microbial communities observed
during periods of higher flow is largely due to particleassociated bacteria, sediment deposition combined with dilution and mixing of Stekoa Creek populations with river
microbial assemblages may explain the high similarity of the
microbial communities upstream of Stekoa Creek (R1-R5) to
communities further downstream at site R7.
Environmental quality and recreation activities
This study also explored the relationship among environmental quality issues, health concerns, and recreation
activity of whitewater rafting guides working on the Chattooga River. Whitewater raft guides displayed a range of
responses to questions about environmental quality. A distinct suite of responses about environmental concern is associated with survey participants who have experienced skin
infections during the study period (Fig. 3). The correlation
between skin infections and the range of responses found in
the lower right quadrant of the ‘‘environmental concern
space’’ illustrated in Figure 3 suggests that the environmental
concerns of whitewater rafting guides may be shaped by
incidence of skin infection. This group of guides also reported changes in their work and recreation behavior due to
concerns about water quality (Fig. 4).
A gradient of perceived risk to the health of rafters (related
to degraded environmental quality) was also apparent in the
ordination of guides based on their environmental concerns
(Fig. 5). Although there was a good correlation between risk
perception and prior experience with bacterial skin infections, some guides reported a high level of concern about
their health without having experienced skin infections in
summer 2007 or in previous years. All guides who reported
alterations in work and recreation behavior had experienced
skin infections, but changes in rafting practices were not always correlated with a strong level of concern about health
of rafters (Figs. 3–5). In addition, some people who had experienced skin infections did not alter their behavior.
Environmental awareness in this region is enhanced by
a strong local grassroots conservation organization, The
Chattooga Conservancy. Communication by such groups



516
can be instrumental in shaping the attitudes of consumers of
recreation resources (Pendleton et al., 2001). However, the
strong correlations between incidence of skin infection,
changes in work and recreation activities, and concern for
rafter health due to degraded environmental quality support
the hypothesis that the environmental attitudes of these
recreation workers have been shaped by their personal experiences as well. Correlations between elevated risk perception and prior illness from swimming activities have been
noted in other studies (Langford et al., 2000; Turbow et al.,
2004).
The subset of whitewater rafting guides who reported skin
infections but have either not altered work behavior or did
not report a high level of concern for their health bears closer
examination. Previous studies on health risks due to beach
contamination suggest that this perceived disregard for
health risks may be attributable to insufficient information or
communication about pollution and health risks (Pendleton
et al., 2001). The local conservation activities in and around
the river (Chattooga) make it unlikely that whitewater raft
guides would be unaware of water quality issues affecting the
Chattooga River and Stekoa Creek, though many of the
guides are seasonal workers and may not be involved in local
environmental conservation efforts. Other studies have suggested that personal characteristics might lead some people to
downplay perceived risk (Golden et al., 1996). Outdoor enthusiasts such as whitewater raft guides may be particularly
predisposed toward risk taking (Robinson, 1992; Vagias et al.,
2005). In addition, previous research has indicated that voluntary participation in risk-related activities may reduce the
perception of risk compared with activities where the participant has less control (Sandman, 1987; Scherer, 1990; Turbow
et al., 2004). Familiarity with an activity lessens the perception
of risk (Brannan et al., 1992; Cheron and Ritchie, 1982). Thus,
frequent exposure to the impaired water may actually lessen
the perceived health risk for whitewater raft guides. This may
offer a partial explanation for rafters who are not translating
their previous experience with bacterial skin infections and
concerns about degraded water quality into concerns for their
personal health.
Conclusion
Degraded water quality in Stekoa Creek has been a concern for more than a decade. Contamination of the Chattooga
River by fecal bacteria from Stekoa Creek may pose a health
risk for boaters and swimmers who recreate on the river. We
demonstrate here that inputs from the impaired creek to the
protected waters of the Chattooga River influence the microbial community composition of the river water, thus
rafters on the Chattooga River are exposed to potential
pathogens present in Stekoa Creek waters. Whitewater rafting guides who work on this river reported concerns about
their personal health related to degraded water quality and
microbial contamination from Stekoa Creek. Health concerns
related to the microbial ecology of this ecosystem have
spurred action to expand coliform monitoring beyond the
Stekoa Creek to the Chattooga River, including several
points upstream and downstream of the confluence (Chattooga Conservancy, 2007b). Our results indicate a strong
relationship between skin infection and environmental
awareness among the whitewater raft guides. Recreation on

KENT AND BAYNE
the Chattooga River has a high tourism value, and increased
awareness of microbial contamination and water quality issues has the potential for broad impact if perceived risk begins to alter recreation behavior.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Courtney Flint for assistance in design
of the survey instrument, Sara Paver for assistance in clone
library construction, and Anthony Yannarell for helpful
comments on this article. This research was supported by a
Special Undergraduate Research on the Environment grant
to Z.L.B. from the Environmental Council at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
References
Brannan, L., Condello, C., Stuckum, N., Vissers, N., and Priest, S.
(1992). Public perceptions of risk in recreational activities.
J Appl Recreation Res 17, 144–157.
Cabelli, V.J., Dufour, A.P., McCabe, L.J., and Levin, M.A. (1982).
Swimming-associated gastroenteritis and water quality. Am J
Epidemiol 115, 606–616.
Charoenca, N., and Fujioka, R.S. (1995). Association of staphylococcal skin infections and swimming. Water Sci Technol 31,
11–17.
Chattooga Conservancy. (2005). Watershed Update: Conservancy
Finds Clayton Sewer Leaks, Chattooga Quarterly. Winter, 2005
(Chattooga Conservancy, Clayton, GA).
Chattooga Conservancy. (2007a). Stekoa Creek Water Monitoring
Project. Available at: www.chattoogariver.org=index.php?lev¼
stekoa&req¼data
Chattooga Conservancy. (2007b). Watershed Update: Stekoa Creek
Pollution Update, Chattooga Quarterly. Summer=Fall, 2007
(Chattooga Conservancy, Clayton, GA).
Chattooga River Watershed Coalition. (1997). Chattooga
Watershed Conservation Plan. Available at: http:==www
.chattoogariver.org=ccp=CCPlan.pdf
Cheron, E.J., and Ritchie, J.R.B. (1982). Leisure activities and
perceived risk. J Leis Res 14, 139–154.
Clarke, K., and Green, R. (1988). Statistical design and analysis
for a biological effects study. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 46, 213–226.
Clinton, B.D., and Vose, J.M. (2006). Variation in stream water
quality in an urban headwater stream in the southern Appalachians. Water Air Soil Pollut 169, 331–353.
Colburn, K. (2003). Infections are the leading cause of river related injury among paddlers. Finger Lakes-Ontario Watershed
Paddlers’ Club Newsletter 8, 3.
Crump, B.C., Armbrust, E.V., and Baross, J.A. (1999). Phylogenetic analysis of particle-attached and free-living bacterial
communities in the Columbia river, its estuary, and the adjacent coastal ocean. Appl Environ Microbiol 65, 3192–3204.
Crump, B.C., and Hobbie, J.E. (2005). Synchrony and seasonality
in bacterioplankton communities of two temperate rivers.
Limnol Oceanogr 50, 1718–1729.
Decker, M.D., Lybarger, J.A., Vaughn, W.K., Hutcheson, R.H.,
and Schaffner, W. (1986). An outbreak of staphylococcal skin
infections among river rafting guides. Am J Epidemiol 124,
969–976.
Dwight, R.H., Baker, D.B., Semenza, J.C., and Olson, B.H.
(2004). Health effects associated with recreational coastal



MICROBIAL COMMUNITY COMPOSITION IN THE CHATTOOGA RIVER
water use: urban versus rural California. Am J Public Health
94, 565–567.
Fisher, M.M., and Triplett, E.W. (1999). Automated approach for
ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis of microbial diversity and
its application to freshwater bacterial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 65, 4630–4636.
Fukushima, H., Tsunomori, Y., and Seki, R. (2003). Duplex realtime SYBR green PCR assays for detection of 17 species of
food- or waterborne pathogens in stools. J Clin Microbiol 41,
5134–5146.
Golden, L.L., Frels, J.K., Vincent, V.C., and de los Santos, G.
(1996). Ecological information receptivity of Hispanic and
Anglo Americans. Adv Consum Res 23, 189–195.
Kent, A.D., Jones, S.E., Yannarell, A.C., Lauster, G.H., Graham,
J.H., Kratz, T.K., and Triplett, E.W. (2004). Annual patterns in
bacterioplankton community variability in a humic lake. Microb Ecol 48, 550–560.
Kent, A.D., Yannarell, A.C., Rusak, J.A., Triplett, E.W., and
McMahon, K.D. (2007). Synchrony in aquatic microbial community dynamics. ISME J 1, 38–47.
Langford, I.H., Georgiou, S., Bateman, I.J., Day, R.J., and Turner,
R.K. (2000). Public perceptions of health risks from polluted
coastal bathing waters: a mixed methodological analysis using
cultural theory. Risk Anal 20, 691–704.
Legendre, P., and Legendre, L. (1998). Numerical Ecology, second
edition (Elsevier Science, BV, Amsterdam).
Lemarchand, C., Jardillier, L., Carrias, J.F., Richardot, M., Debroas, D., Sime-Ngando, T., and Amblard, C. (2006). Community composition and activity of prokaryotes associated to
detrital particles in two contrasting lake ecosystems. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 57, 442–451.
Pendleton, L., Martin, N., and Webster, D.G. (2001). Public
perceptions of environmental quality: a survey study of beach
use and perceptions in Los Angeles County. Mar Poll Bull 42,
1155–1160.
Pruitt, B.A., Melgaard, D.L., Howard, H., Flexner, M.C., and
Able, A.S. (2001). Chattooga River watershed ecological=
sedimentation project. Presented at the Federal Interagency
Sedimentation Conference (Reno, NV). March 26–30, 2001.
Rees, G.N., Baldwin, D.S., Watson, G.O., Perryman, S., and
Nielsen, D.L. (2004). Ordination and significance testing of
microbial community composition derived from terminal restriction fragment length polymorphisms: application of
multivariate statistics. Anton Leeuw Int JG 86, 339–347.
Riedel, M.S., and Vose, J.M. (2002). The dynamic nature of
sediment and organic constituents in TSS. Presented at the
National Monitoring Conference 2002: Building a Framework
for the Future (Madison, WI). May 20–23, 2002.
Robinson, D.W. (1992). A descriptive model of enduring risk
recreation involvement. J Leis Res 24, 52–63.
Sandman, P.M. (1987). Risk communication: facing public outrage. EPA J 13, 21–22.
Scherer, C.W. (1990). Communicating water quality risk. J Soil
Water Conserv 45, 198–200.
Scott, T.M., Rose, J.B., Jenkins, T.M., Farrah, S.R., and Lukasik, J.
(2002). Microbial source tracking: current methodology and
future directions. Appl Environ Microbiol 68, 5796–5803.

517

Shade, A.L., Kent, A.D., Jones, S.E., Newton, R.J., Triplett, E.W.,
and McMahon, K.D. (2007). Interannual dynamics and phenology of bacterial communities in a eutrophic lake. Limnol
Oceanogr 52, 487–494.
Shanks, O.C., Domingo, J.W.S., Lu, J., Kelty, C.A., and Graham,
J.E. (2007). Identification of bacterial DNA markers for the
detection of human fecal pollution in water. Appl Environ
Microbiol 73, 2416–2422.
Takeuchi, M., Hamana, K., and Hiraishi, A. (2001). Proposal of
the genus Sphingomonas sensu stricto and three new genera,
Sphingobium, Novosphingobium and Sphingopyxis, on the basis
of phylogenetic and chemotaxonomic analyses. Int J Syst Evol
Microbiol 51, 1405–1417.
Turbow, D., Lin, T.H., and Jiang, S. (2004). Impacts of beach
closures on perceptions of swimming-related health risk in
Orange County, California. Mar Poll Bull 48, 132–136.
[US EPA] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2009).
National Water Quality Inventory: Report to Congress, 2004
Reporting Cycle (US EPA Office of Water, Washington. D.C.)
EPA 841-R-08-001.
Vagias, W., Morais, D., and Dziubek, D. (2005). The role of risk
perception in a one-day wilderness whitewater rafting trip. In:
Proceedings of the 2005 Northeastern Recreation Research Symposium; 2005 April 10–12; Bolton Landing, NY. Gen. Tech. Rep. NE341. J.G. Peden and R.M. Schuster, comps., eds. (U.S. Forest
Service, Northeastern Research Station, Newtown Square,
PA).
Vergin, K.L., Rappe, M.S., and Giovannoni, S.J. (2001). Streamlined method to analyze 16S rRNA gene clone libraries. Biotechniques 30, 938–944.
Winter, C., Hein, T., Kavka, G., Mach, R.L., and Farnleitner, A.H.
(2007). Longitudinal changes in the bacterial community
composition of the Danube River: a whole-river approach.
Appl Environ Microbiol 73, 421–431.
Yannarell, A.C., and Kent, A.D. (2009). Bacteria, distribution and
community structure. In: Encyclopedia of Inland Waters. G.E.
Likens, ed. (Elsevier, Oxford).
Yannarell, A.C., and Triplett, E.W. (2005). Geographic and environmental sources of variation in lake bacterial community
composition. Appl Environ Microbiol 71, 227–239.
Yoder, J.S., Hlavsa, M.C., Craun, G.F., Hill, V., Roberts, V., Yu,
P.A., Hicks, L.A., Alexander, N.T., Calderon, R.L., Roy, S.L.,
and Beach, M.J. (2008). Surveillance for waterborne disease
and outbreaks associated with recreational water use and
other aquatic facility-associated health events—United States,
2005–2006. Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 57, 1–38.

Address correspondence to:
Angela D. Kent, Ph.D.
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1102 S. Goodwin Ave.
Urbana, IL 61801
E-mail: akent@illinois.edu
Received for publication November 1, 2009; received in revised form December 1, 2009; accepted December 2, 2009.



