Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 28(4):371–409 (2002)

Microbial Agents Associated with Waterborne
Diseases
H. Leclerc,1,3 L. Schwartzbrod,2 and E. Dei-Cas1,3
1

Faculté de Médecine de Lille, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie de Nancy, France;
Institut Pasteur de Lille, France

3

* Correspondence to: Professor H. Leclerc, Faculté de Médecine de Lille – Pôle recherche, 1 Place de
Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France (e-mail: hleclerc@univ-lille2.fr)

I. INTRODUCTION
Four epidemiological categories were
initially devised for classifying water-related
infectious “diseases” with regard to the engineering technologies required to prevent
or control them. The categories defined for
water transmission of infectious agents were
waterborne (classic and other); water washed
(intestinal and body surface); water-based
(dependent on intermediate aquatic host(s);
and water-related insect vectors (breed in/
bite near water).1,2,3 Waterborne diseases are
those transmitted through the ingestion of
contaminated water and water acts as the
passive carrier of the infectious agent.
The use of operative words such as
“waterborne” and “disease” is justified for
reports of outbreaks or cases of disease associated with drinking water because traditional epidemiological investigation relies on
the occurrence of disease, which for drinking water is primarily waterborne. The use
of “waterborne” as a generic term encompassing all infections arising from water use,
however, is too simplistic and poses difficulties when attempting a theoretical analysis of water-associated infections, because
not all develop from the ingestion of water.
Likewise, “disease” should not be used synonymously with “infection”, which may be

either asymptomatic (without clinical expression) or symptomatic (clinically observable
syndrome and therefore a “disease”, when
the causal agent was identified). It could be
argued that if “disease” is not the end result
of a water-related infection with a pathogenic agent then the role of water in its
epidemiology is unimportant. However,
many of the bacteria and viruses that may be
spread in low levels by the water route produce asymptomatic infections. This seeding
of susceptible individuals could result in an
endemic situation with the potential for an
epidemic to occur from direct person-to-person, food, or water spread (through contamination with greater levels of pathogenic
agents released from infected carriers). Therefore, for the purposes of clarification and
general discussion, the use of “infection”
instead of “disease” is preferred.
This review attempts to describe present
knowledge about waterborne diseases, their
epidemiology, and the microbial agents commonly associated.

II. WATERBORNE DISEASES AND
ETIOLOGIC AGENTS
A wide variety of bacterial, viral, and
protozoan pathogens excreted in feces are

1040-841X/02/$.50
© 2002 by CRC Press LLC

371



capable of initiating waterborne infections,
although the potential for this, predicted from
latency, survival, and infective dose data,
which is usually higher for viruses and protozoa, remains unknown in many cases.
Waterborne spread of infection by pathogenic agents depends on factors such as
pathogen survival in water and the dose required for establishing infection in susceptible individuals. In addition to pathogen
survival, latency (the period between pathogen excretion and acquisition of actual infectious power) and pathogen ability for
multiplication in the environment are factors
influencing the infective dose. The minimum
infective dose has been determined only for
some bacteria, viruses, or protozoa that are
excreted with feces and thus potentially water
transmitted.
Therefore, it is important to distinguish
different classes of pathogens.
1.

2.

3.

372

Viruses may only remain static in number or die off. They cannot grow in the
receiving waters; they cannot, indeed,
multiply outside of susceptible living
cells. The infective dose of these agents
is low, typically in the range of one to
ten infectious units.
Enteric protozoa such as Giardia and
Cryptosporidium are highly resistant in
the aquatic environment and to most disinfectants and antiseptics commonly used
in water treatment. Like viruses, they
cannot multiply in the receiving waters.
The infective dose of Cryptosporidium in
humans is highly variable in terms of the
strain virulence4 and probably of the host
susceptibility.
The recognized waterborne bacterial
pathogens include enteric and aquatic
bacteria. The persistence of enteric bacteria, including Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., and Escherichia coli, in the
aquatic environment depends on various parameters, but especially being a

function of nutrients present and temperature. Although enteric bacteria are
usually assumed to exist under starving
conditions, there is evidence that some
can grow in fresh water. Other bacterial infectious agents such as Legionella
spp., Aeromonas spp., Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Mycobacterium avium
are indigenous aquatic organisms that
can both survive and proliferate in
drinking water. An additional mode of
water-related transmission is through
the direct inhalation of aerosols, specifically with Legionella pneumophila,
the etiologic agent of Legionnaires’ disease and probably with nontuberculous
mycobacteria such as Mycobacterium
avium. The infectious dose of historic
enteric bacteria are in the range of 107
to 108 cells but much lower with some
species, including Shigella spp.,
Campylobacter spp., and enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7.
This discussion concerns the epidemiology of waterborne diseases, that is to say the
rates of infection and characteristics of the
diseases principally associated with waterborne transmission in developed countries.
The situation is markedly different in developed or developing countries. In many worldwide countries, more illnesses and deaths
result from sheer lack of availability of water in quantities sufficient for personal and
household hygienic uses than from impurities in drinking water. These deficiencies in
quantity or availability, along with malnutrition and lack of medical care, are responsible for the millions of deaths ascribed annually to diarrhea and enteritis, which are
water associated, but much less commonly
waterborne. In 1997 diarrhea disease ranked
first in the WHO report’s assessment of
causes of morbidity (4.109) and sixth in
causes of mortality.5,6 It can be suggested
that up to 70% of diarrhea illness could oc-



cur by contaminated food, and therefore 30%
could result from polluted water origin. It
should also be stated that food responsible
for outbreaks could be contaminated by
water.
The most complete data on waterborne
disease are those reported for the United
States by the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). Two or more persons must show the same clinical symptoms
before the incident is included in the statistics. Water systems are classified as community water systems, noncommunity systems,
and private or individual water systems. National statistics dating back to 1920 on outbreaks associated with drinking water were
analyzed by Craun2,7,8 in an attempt to estimate the effects and adequacy of public health
programs, regulations, treatment technologies, and microbial monitoring. Epidemiological course of waterborne disease in the

U.S. (Figure 1) is marked by a clear-cut
break of bacterial diseases during the period
1920 through 1998 with continuance of
shigellosis, emergence of campylobacteriosis
and E. coli O157:H7 hemorrhagic colitis,
and correlatively by extended incidence of
protozoan outbreaks from 1970s, including
the largest documented incident in Milwaukee in 1993 since record keeping began in
1920. During the last decade, the etiology of
acute gastroenteritis (AGI) was not determined in almost half of the outbreaks. However, in many of these outbreaks, a viral
etiology (Norwalk agents, human rotaviruses,
and adenoviruses) has been suspected and
was supported by the detection of Norwalk
agents in the US in 1980 to 1990s.3,9 Several
reports and reviews have been published
recently in the U.S. on the concern.6,10,11,12,13,14
Unfortunately, there is a paucity of data
available on the occurrence in Europe of
outbreaks of water-related infections. This

FIGURE 1. Etiology of waterborne outbreaks, United States of America, 1920–1996.

373



may be because water-related outbreaks are
rare in Europe, but it is more likely attributed to the problems associated with epidemiological investigations of such outbreaks.
Some reports on European waterborne disease have been published, including the
U.K.15 and Nordic countries,16 while Hunter17
conducted the most comprehensive review
of waterborne disease world-wide.
It is generally agreed that waterborne
outbreak reports are incomplete. A growing
number of reports6,8,18 indicate that waterborne disease is far more prevalent than reported outbreaks. Craun7,8 suggests that only
one-half to one-third, or even one-tenth, of
waterborne outbreaks occurring in the U.S.
are detected, investigated, and reported. According to Morris and Levin,18 annual incidence in the U.S. could be 7 to 8 million
cases of illness and 1200 deaths attributable
to waterborne infectious disease.

1920 through 1960 to 1970. This applies
particularly to typhoid fever, which is seen
rarely since 1970 as a result of the widespread application of disinfecting and filtration treatments, introduced between 1890 and
1900. Deaths from waterborne infections
were almost entirely attributed to typhoid
fever from 1920 to 1945 to 1950.8 On the
other hand, the number of reported outbreaks
of salmonellosis has been relatively stable
over the years, whereas those of shigellosis
have increased (Figure 2). Since 1961, Shigella sonnei has become the most prevalent
bacterial agent, replacing S. flexneri that
dominated previously. The change in Shigella species causing the majority of cases
of illness can probably be explained by a
similar change in incidence of Shigella serotypes in patients.

B. Campylobacter
III. BACTERIAL ENTEROPATHOGENS
A. Salmonella – Shigella
Waterborne outbreaks of bacterial origin
in the U.S. have declined dramatically from

Waterborne outbreaks caused by Campylobacter jejuni in the U.S. (three outbreaks
1971 to 1980, 10 outbreaks 1981 to 1990,
three outbreaks 1991 to 1996)2,8 demonstrate
that Campylobacter is now a leading cause
of bacterial gastroenteritis in the commu-

FIGURE 2. Comparison of typhoid fever and shigellosis occurring in the waterborne
outbreaks (USA, 1930–1990). I, typhoid fever outbreaks, G, shigellosis outbreaks.

374



nity. It is isolated as commonly as Salmonella and Shigella from patients with diarrhea; it is the most frequently identified bacterial cause of diarrhea in the U.S. and the
U.K. Human campylobacteriosis is a severe
disease, often leading to serious sequel and
sometimes resulting in death. Following the
introduction of an improved surveillance system in England and Wales, the Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre observed
26 outbreaks between 1992 to 1995 in which
there was evidence for waterborne transmission of infection.19 In Nordic–European countries, campylobacters have been known as
important human pathogens since the late
1970s. More recently, they were associated
with presumed waterborne outbreaks;20,21 in
Finland, a waterborne epidemic in a hospital
caused nearly hundred persons to become
ill. 22 Other outbreaks have been described in
Canada23,24 and in New Zealand.25
Campylobacter species appear to be particularly well adapted to the avian intestinal
tract, thus causing poultry to be the primary
vehicle of transmission to humans. 26
Campylobacter enteritis is a zoonosis and
animals used for food production, such as
poultry, account for a large reservoir of environmental pollution. Virtually all surface
waters contain campylobacters, even in remote areas, where contamination stems from
wild birds. Waterborne outbreaks typically
follow the consumption of untreated surface
water that may be contaminated with bird
feces. 27
The occurrence of thermophilic campylobacters was studied in river and lake waters, some of which was the source of the
drinking water. C. jejuni was recovered frequently from samples of fresh water.28,29,30
Campylobacter-type bacteria were found,
however, in treated water because they are
susceptible to chlorination.31 The first isolation of C. jejuni from groundwater32 supports the theory that groundwater may be a
vehicle for campylobacter transmission. In

water microcosm experiments, factors such
as temperature, oxygenation, anaerobic conditions, nutrient, and biofilms influence the
survival times.33,34 Survival was enhanced
by the presence of autochthonous microflora
and nutrient with decreasing temperature and
anaerobic conditions. The existence of viable but noncultivable campylobacter, and
their power for retaining pathogenicity and
virulence35,36,37 was a debatable point until it
appeared elucidated by Cappelier et al.38 and
Talibart et al.39
The spread of Arcobacter organisms (previously designated as aerotolerant Campylobacter) via the drinking water path must
be suspected.40,41 Some cases of acute diarrhea, however, were associated with
Arcobacter butzleri;42 little is known about
the clinical significance of infections in humans.

C. Escherichia coli O157:H7
Escherichia coli O157:H7, first recognized as a pathogen in 1982,43 is now known
as an important cause of bloody diarrhea
(hemorrhagic colitis) and renal failure
(hemolytic uremic syndrome) in humans. Its
pathogenicity has been attributed in part to
the production of toxin cytotoxic for Vero
cells (a fibroblastic green monkey kidney
line cell). The toxin was appropriately named
Verotoxin (VT), and the group of E. coli that
produce VT became known as the Verotoxinproducing E. coli (VTEC).44 Subsequently,
other verotoxin-producing E. coli strains have
been associated with hemorrhagic colitis and
hemolytic ureic syndrome.44 E. coli O157:H7,
however, is recognized as the most common
cause of VTEC-related human illness. VTEC,
including E. coli O157:H7, are strongly associated with cattle, and they can clearly
pass through stomachs of ruminants. The
transmission of VTEC O157 is often foodborne, particularly from contaminated ground

375



beef or raw milk, or person-to-person, and
contact with farmed animals has also resulted in human infection. Farmed and wild
animals grazing in water catchment areas,
however, are a potential source of fecal contamination, and therefore of waterborne
VTEC O157 infection. VTEC O157 is particularly adapted for surviving in the aquatic
environment, as suggested by outbreaks associated with swimming in lakes (Wang and
Doyle, 1998).45,46 It is capable of surviving
for many days, especially at cold temperatures.
The waterborne route of VTEC O157
infection was first clearly demonstrated
by an unusually large outbreak by
unchlorinated municipal water in the Missouri Community. 47 Since then, waterborne VTEC O157 has been described in
sporadic cases and in outbreaks of illness. Chalmers et al. 48 have analyzed published outbreaks of VTEC O157 associated with recreational waters, private and
municipal supplies. Despite the potential
for large contamination of environment
with VTEC O157, however, waterborne
infection is relatively rare because VTEC
O157 is as susceptible to chlorination as
bacterial indicators. 48
Epidemiological investigations have
elucidated the mechanisms by which E. coli
O157:H7, Shigella spp., and campylobacters
have become a source of concern recently.
The most striking feature is the low inoculum of organisms that may trigger disease.
As few as 10 to 100 organisms of the most
virulent S. dysenteriae type 1 are sufficient
to cause clinical dysentery, while the other
species may require a 10 to 100 times more
elevated dose.49 The dose required to trigger campylobacteriosis is also low, probably no more than a few hundred bacteria.50,51 E. coli O157:H7, like Shigella and
C. jejuni, appears to have a low infectious
dose, approximately some hundred organisms or less.52

376

D. Yersinia enterocolitica
Bacteria of the genus Yersinia have been
isolated commonly from the environment,
including water supplies of various types.
Environmental strains therefore should be
differentiated from serotypes O:3, O:9, O:5,
O:27 and O:8 of Y. enterocolitica, which are
the most frequently ones associated with
human infections in Europe, Japan, Canada,
and the U.S. 53 These pathotypes are
psychrotrophic, and hence can multiply in
fresh waters and could constitute a major
hazard to drinking water. Epidemiological
data concerning waterborne yersiniosis, however, are scarce (Schieman, 1990)53 and involve only a small number of individuals. A
large outbreak of intestinal illness at a Montana ski resort in 1977 was suggested to be
waterborne yersiniosis,54 but the many strains
isolated from water sources were later identified as nonpathogenic, leaving the cause of
this outbreak uncertain.17 Three prospective
studies from Norway55,56 and from New
Zealand57 seem to demonstrate that, however, Y. enterocolitica could be waterborne
in these area.
Y. enterocolitica became the repository
for a large number of “atypical” or
Y. enterocolitica-like strains. Usually isolated from terrestrial and fresh water ecosystems, they are often referred to environmental strains, including nonpathogenic serotypes
of Y. enterocolitica and the related species
Y. aldovae, Y. bercovieri, Y. frederiksenii,
Y. intermedia, Y. kristensenii, Y. mollaretii,
and Y. rohdei.58 These aquatic environmental strains were, however, relatively common in the examined water supplies.59,60,61

E. Vibrio cholerae
Cholera caused by toxigenic Vibrio
cholerae is a major public health problem
concerning developing countries, where out-



breaks occur in a regular seasonal pattern
and are associated with poverty and poor
sanitation. Among the 193 currently recognized O serogroups of V. cholerae, only
serogroups O1 and O139 have been associated with epidemics of cholera. The other
serogroups usually referred to as non-O1,
non O-139, can cause sporadic diarrhea.62
This sharp distinction between serogroups is
related to virulence associated genes. The
strains belonging to serogroups O1 and O139
(more than 95%) produce cholera toxin (CT)
and colonization factor known as toxincoregulated pilus (TCP) that is coordinately
regulated with CT production. In contrast,
the strains of non-O1 non-O-139 (more than
95%) serogroups lack these two virulence
genes.
From 1817 to 1994, seven distinct
pandemics of cholera occurred; all these were
caused by V. cholerae O1. During the first
six pandemics, cholera remained principally
confined to South and Southeast Asia,
whereas the seventh pandemic reached West
and East Africa and South America. In late
1992, V. cholerae belonging to a non-O1
serogroup (now referred as O139 Bengal)
caused explosive epidemics of cholera
through India, Bangladesh, and neighboring
countries.
Systematic surveillance of cholera in
these countries from 1992 to 2000 revealed
temporal alternation or coexistence of
V. cholerae O1 and O139 in different regions.63,64,65 A clone of serogroup O37 demonstrated epidemic potential in the 1960s.66
The close evolutionary relationships among
O1, O139 and O37 epidemic clones indicates that new cholera clones were likely
arisen from a lineage that was already epidemic or closely related to such a
clone.63,66,67,68 An endemic focus of cholera was reported in the U.S. in 1970 to
1990s. Most cases were associated with
the consumption of undercooked crabs or
shrimp, or raw oysters from the Gulf of

Mexico.69 In Europe, several countries were
affected (concerned) by cholera in the
1990s.70,71,72,73
V. cholerae is now recognized as an
autochtonous member of the microflora in
many aquatic environments such as in riverine and estuarine areas. The importance of
water ecology is suggested by the close association of V. cholerae with surface water
and population interacting with the waterfood also plays an essential role, although in
many instances water is the source of contamination of foods.74 Many ecological aspects remain unknown to explain seasonal
appearance epidemic V. cholerae strains and
outbreaks of cholera. Recent data suggest
that Vibrio features can be involved:
1.

2.

The state of an aquatic reservoir of
V. cholerae O1 or O139 being capable not only to survive in water but
also to form a complete component
of the ecosystem.75 It has been postulated that under stress conditions the
vibrios can be converted to a viable
but nonculturable form (VNC)76,77,78 that
can be reverted back to live infectious bacteria.
The major pathogenic gene in toxinogenic
V. cholerae are clustered in several chromosomic regions (CTX genetic element
and TCP pathogenicity island) that are
capable of being propagated horizontally
to non-O1 and non-O139 strains by
lysogenic conversion.63 More recently,
Chakraborty et al.62 have demonstrated
the occurrence and expression of critical
virulence genes in environmental strains
of V. cholerae that appear to constitute an
environmental reservoir of virulence
genes. These new data on the ecology of
V. cholerae appear to be of great significance. Likewise, that non O1 and non
O139 strains are more commonly detected
than O1 and O139 strains, in fresh water
and estuarine areas, is also relevant. 63,79,80

377



In outbreaks with a bacterial etiology,
the CDC and the EPA make efforts to relate
waterborne-disease surveillance with processing deficiencies. Thus, it has been established that untreated surface or ground water, inadequate disinfecting procedures or
distribution system were the major causes of
waterborne outbreaks; control of such deficiencies is usually within reach. These conclusions substantiate the basic concepts of
management of enteric diseases by multiple
barriers and monitoring by using indicators.6

IV. PUTATIVE BACTERIAL
PATHOGENS THAT GROW IN
WATER SUPPLIES
Like fecal pathogens that may have access to the aquatic environment and survive
or remain viable but nonculturable, other
bacterial pathogens are able to multiply in
water even with low levels of organic nutrients. They are opportunistic pathogens in
humans, but concern about their occurrence
in drinking water is disputed. The most important organisms to consider are Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aeromonas, Legionella, and
Mycobacterium avium complex.

A. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an ubiquitous microorganism, inhabitant of fresh waters, soil, and plants. This bacterium has been
isolated from numerous vegetables, such as
tomatoes, radishes, cucumbers, onions, and
lettuces81 at rates capable of reaching 103/g.
Its presence is constant and abundant in waste
waters82,83 and consequently in surface waters that receive polluted effluents. Its growth
in water is not directly linked to the organic
matter content, because it can develop abundantly in the purest of waters. P. aeruginosa
is a species of considerable versatility and a

378

significant pathogen that can cause infection
in a variety of plants, insects, and warmblooded animals. In man it is an opportunist
pathogen, well known in the hospital environment; it seems likely to be the cause of 10
to 20% of nosocomial infections. Its extreme
resistance to antibiotics explains why this
ubiquitous bacteria has been selected to colonize the skin and mucous membranes of
patients.
As some P. aeruginosa strains are capable
of producing enterotoxins, the enteropathogenicity of this species was sometimes surmized.
Since 1894, many later publications have recognized this bacterium as an enteric pathogen
and causative agent of diarrhea in infants and
children.84,85,86,87 Enteric disease associated with
septicaemia was described earlier by Dold in
191888 as “Shangai fever”, a prolonged febrile
illness that affected both children and adults.
As expounded by Hardalo and Edberg89 the
colonization of children by P. aeruginosa
quickly ceases once the environmental sanitary conditions are corrected. Moreover, each
of these “infections” was diagnosed before there
were adequate means of precluding a viral or
protozoan etiology. Community acquired
P. aeruginosa gastrointestinal disease with sepsis rarely occurs in healthy infants, that is,
those who lack identified underlying immunological or haematological problems.90 On the
other hand, P. aeruginosa can be a colonizer of
the gastrointestinal tract in immunocompromised
and hospitalized adults and children. There
have been no significant outbreaks reported in
recent decades, possibly as result of better
hygienic control measures and diagnostic techniques.90 Moreover, a 1969 study91 demonstrated that the ingestion of up to 106 viable
P. aeruginosa did not lead to infection or colonization, but only to a brief period of recovery
of the organism from the stool.
In the past, Hoadley92 considered the
presence of P. aeruginosa in drinking water
as a public health risk. However,
P. aeruginosa is predominantly an environ-



mental organism and fresh surface water an
ideal reservoir. As a consequence of contemporary lifestyles, P. aeruginosa reaches
relatively high numbers in food and on moist
surfaces. Daily, substantial numbers of the
species are ingested with our food, particularly with raw vegetables, while our body
surfaces also are in continuous contact with
the organism. The risk to the general population originating from P. aeruginosa in
drinking water is insignificant, and Hardalo
and Edberg89 think that attempts at guideline
for P. aeruginosa in drinking water would
not yield public health protection benefits.
On the other hand, this bacterium is primarily a nosocomial pathogen.93 There is abundant evidence that specific hosts are at risk
for an infection with P. aeruginosa, including patients with deep neutropenia, cystic
fibrosis, severe burns, and those subject to
foreign device installation.94,95,96 For these
highly vulnerable hosts water supplies in
hospitals with P. aeruginosa should be
avoided.

B. Aeromonas
Many experimental, clinical, and epidemiological data tend to lend credence to the
assertion that Aeromonas may be etiologically involved in diarrhea illness.97,98,99 Some
authors are more cautious and consider that
only some strains are likely to be pathogenic, a situation similar to that with E. coli
and Y. enterocolitica.100 Beyond any doubt,
Aeromonas may be isolated as many times
from the feces of patients with diarrhea as
persons without diarrhea, suggesting that
Aeromonas would as a rule be a nonpathogenic “fellow traveler”. The most striking
argument against the role of Aeromonas in
human diarrhea emerged from studies of
Morgan et al.101 with human volunteers; despite that high challenge doses were used,
this investigation failed to establish Aero-

monas spp. as an enteropathogen. However,
the pathogenicity of aeromonads may be
strain or pathovar related.
Aeromonas spp. are widely associated
with environmental waters; most available
strains were not from human fecal origin,
but represented the natural habitat of the
organism. The concentration of mesophilic
aeromonads range from 106 to 108/ml in crude
sewage to 10 to 103/ml in clean river water
like in superficial ground water.102,103,104,105
Aeromonads readily multiply in domestic or
industrial wastewater and are also found in
siphons, sinks, and drainage systems.103 Temperature is an important factor for enhancing
the colonization by aeromonads in wastewater. That is probably the reason why
Aeromonas spp., which are psychrotrophic
organisms, outgrow coliforms in sewage.103,106,107 Hence, aeromonads are natural
residents in wastewater and fresh surface
water, their rate is closely related to organic
load and temperature. On the other hand, it
appears that aeromonads survive poorly in
nutrient-poor waters in comparison with other
autochtonous oligotrophic bacteria.103,108
Since 1962, we have demonstrated that 30%
of drinking water samples found positive for
“fecal-coliforms” indeed contained strains
of Aeromonas that would have falsely indicated that the sample was positive in the
fecal coliform test.109 These observations
have since been confirmed by many
teams.103,110,111
The frequent presence of Aeromonas in
drinking water raised the question of its role
as an enteric pathogen, because production of
enterotoxins and/or adhesins had been demonstrated.74,112,113 Burke110 observed that
Aeromonas spp.-associated gastroenteritis was
closely correlated with mean number of
Aeromonas spp. in water samples within the
distribution systems. The epidemiological
relationship between aeromonads isolated
from humans and those isolated from distribution system has been studied by typing.114

379



These investigations demonstrated conclusively that the aeromonads isolated from the
public water supply were unrelated to those
isolated from patients with gastroenteritis.
With regard to the epidemiological relationship with drinking water, in contrast to other
waterborne pathogens, no clearly defined
outbreaks of diarrhea illness due to Aeromonas
have ever been reported, although this bacterium is frequently isolated from water.115

C. Legionella
The genus Legionella had at least 42 named
species,116 among which L. pneumophila
serogroup 1 is most frequently related to human disease. Legionella infections can lead to
two forms of disease, namely, legionellosis or
Legionnaires’ disease, an acute purulent pneumonia and Pontiac fever, a self-limiting
nonpneumonic disease consisting of fever and
mild constitutional symptoms. Infection is the
result of inhalation of contaminated aerosols.
Legionella is a common inhabitant, usually in low numbers, of natural aquatic habitats and of water supplies that meet drinking
water standards.117 A number of abiotic factors, of which temperature is the most important one, significantly influence Legionella
survival and growth.118 Therefore, hot water
tanks, cooling systems, and towers,119 because
of their heat-exchanging function, serve as
bacterial “amplifiers”. Then, Legionella spp.
are able to colonize all parts of internal distribution systems of hospitals, hotels, or buildings.120,121,122 Thus, these bacteria can potentially infect susceptible persons through
aerosols created in showers bubble baths,
sinks, etc.
Evidence also indicates that amoebae and
other protozoa may be natural hosts and “amplifiers” for legionellae in the environment. Invasion and subsequent intracellular replication of
L. pneumophila within protozoa in the environment should play a major role in the transmis-

380

sion of Legionnaires’ disease.117,123,124,125,126 Recently, it has been shown that viability and infectivity of environmental noncultivable
L. pneumophila can be restored by intracellular
replication within protozoa.127 Intracellular
growth even enhances the infectious power of
L. pneumophila to human-derived cells.128 At
some stage after the ingestion of bacteria, amoebae produce vesicles that contain high numbers
of legionellae, which may reach the alveoli of
the lungs and there constitute an infectious
dose.129
It appears that it is impossible to prevent
the contamination of water supply systems
and reservoirs with legionellae during extended periods of time by thermal eradication or hyperchlorination.124 The risk of infection following exposure to Legionella
cannot be assessed and remains open to
speculation.130 Therefore, risk management
strategies should be introduced to control
Legionella at locations where a health risk is
recognized, that is, in water supply systems
of hospitals, in public spas, in swimming
pools, and whirlpools. Quantifying relative
risks for exposed robust vs. debilitated persons is yet impossible. However, special measures of surveillance and intervention should
be introduced for people with reduced resistance against respiratory disease, such as
elderly people, diabetics, etc.

D. Nontuberculosis Mycobacteria
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex
(M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, and M. africanum)
is composed of species pathogenic for man
and animal, and “nontuberculosis mycobacteria” (NTMs) or “mycobacteria other than
M. tuberculosis”, include the formerly called
“atypical” mycobacteria. In a benchmark review131 the evidence was summarized that some
nontuberculosis mycobacteria were able to
cause disease. The most common among these
include the Mycobacterium avium complex



(MAC) composed of M. avium and
M. intracellulare clearly different species based
on DNA-DNA homology and 16S rRNA sequences.132 On the other hand, on the basis of
DNA homology and phenetic relatedness, it
has been proposed that M. avium, M. paratuberculosis, and the wood pigeon bacillus be
placed in one species with the designations
M. avium subsp. avium, M. avium subsp.
paratuberculosis, M. avium subsp. silvaticum,
respectively.133 It should be noted that a “MAIS”
complex, including M. avium, M. intracellulare,
and M. scrofulaceum has been occasionally
described. However, M. scrofulaceum is genetically and phenetically distinct from
M. avium and M. intracellulare and is not a
member of the M. avium complex.134 Several
other reviews135,136,137,138 have contributed to an
increase in evidence that the environment and
more particularly water may be the vehicle by
which these organisms infect or colonize man.
The concern about nontuberculosis mycobacterial disease has been changed radically by the emergence of the AIDS epidemic throughout the world. Before the
AIDS epidemic and still today in immunocompetent people, nontuberculous mycobacterial disease was primarily pulmonary
and the major pathogens were M. kansasii,
M. avium, and M. intracellulare. In the
absence of evidence of person-to-person
transmission, it was suggested that man is
infected from environmental sources via
aerosols.131 M. scrofulaceum was considered the causative agent of cervical lymphadenitis in children, and M. marinum
was associated with skin infections originating from aquaria or swimming pools.
However, with the advent of the AIDS
epidemic in the U.S. and Europe, in AIDS
patients and other immunodeficient individuals, nontuberculous mycobacterial disease is usually systemic with acid-fast organisms being isolated more commonly
from either blood or stool and caused principally by M. avium. Therefore, infections

possibly occur via the lungs or gastrointestinal tract. Thus, a wider range of sources
and routes of exposure has had to be investigated in AIDS patients. In Africa and
other areas of the developing world, where
the incidence of tuberculosis is high, the
rate of nontuberculous mycobacterial disease in AIDS people is low.139 In all probability AIDS patients die of other infections before they reach a stage at which
slow onset M. avium disease develops.

E. Occurrence of Nontuberculous
Mycobacteria and Transmission in
Water
In contrast to tuberculous bacteria that live
and grow in human tissue, nontuberculous bacteria are free-living saprophytes that are widely
distributed in the environment: water, soil, dust,
and aerosols.138,140,141 They have been recovered from many piped and treated drinking
waters throughout the world.135,136,142,143,144,145,146
NTMs are not contaminants picked up from
another source, but residents able to survive
and grow in water.
The physiological characteristics of
nontuberculous mycobacteria have provided an
understanding of their ecological distribution;138
(1) they grow best at low pH values, that is,
between 5 and 5.5, and (2) microaerobically;138
(3) M. avium strains grow at 45˚C, unlike
M. intracellulare that can grow to only 42˚C;
(4) they grow equally well in water with a high
level of salt and are found in large numbers in
brakish swamps and estuaries; (5) they are hydrophobic and collect largely at air-water interfaces; (6) they are relatively resistant to heavy
metals and may be isolated from water by highly
polluted metals; (7) it has been shown that they
may be responsible for degradation of a wide
variety of xenobiotic organic coumpound; they
are capable of transforming compounds not
readily biodegradable such as humic and fulvic
acids;147 (8) their high resistance to disinfection

381



by chlorine undoubtedly contributes to their
persistence in drinking water systems.138 Several experimental data suggest a role for protozoa present in water environments as host for
pathogenic mycobacteria, such as M. avium.148,149
These attributes favor their survival and even
occasional growth in natural waters such as
fresh water, salt water, and estuaries, in piped
and treated waters such as drinking and domestic waters, swimming pools and aquaria, public
baths, and whirlpools.135,136,138,141,146,148 Increases
in the immunodeficient population and the prevalence of nontuberculous mycobacteria in water
systems contribute to an emerging problem of
waterborne mycobacterial infections.
Von Reyn et al.144 were among the first
to document a relationship between infections in AIDS patients, and water as the
source of the M. avium complex, examination of isolates from patients and from waters by PFGE showing identical patterns.
The study from Aronson et al.150 also supports the possibility that potable water is a
source of the nosocomial spread of M. avium
infections in hospitals. Recirculating hot
water systems, used in many institutions such
as hospitals, hotels, apartments, and office
buildings, may allow thermotrophic and chlorine-resistant mycobacteria to persist and
colonize once they have been introduced from
municipal systems. 136,142 Infection with
M. avium complex is thought to occur from
colonization of the gastrointestinal tract,151
although respiratory access has also been
documented.152 Therefore, hot water showers may be the source of infection, but it
cannot be excluded that drinking water acts
as a possible source, because a common tap
may deliver both hot and cold water.153
Before the emergence of the AIDS epidemic, M. kansasii infection were generally
more common than M. avium complex infections. The AIDS epidemic has had, in
most countries, a striking effect on the incidence of disease caused by the M. avium
complex but not M. kansasii. Indeed, be-

382

tween 1984 to 1992 there has been a 10-fold
increase in the number of M. avium complex
infections compared with M. kansasii infections in England.154 M. kansasii disease in
immunocompetent patients (e.g., those with
AIDS) can be disseminated or exclusively
Pulmonary. There have been a number of
reports relating the occurrence of M. kansasii
in drinking water and shower heads.135,138,155,156
Therefore, like with the M. avium complex
infections, the water exposure route may be
possible.
M. paratuberculosis is the agent of
Johne’s disease in cattle. Several data have
suggested that M. paratuberculosis may be
also implicated with Crohn’s disease in humans, which is a chronic, invalidating, inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal
tract.138 Epidemiologic studies of incidence
and geographic distribution of disease have
led Herman Taylor et al.157 to propose that it
is due to the transmission of M. paratuberculosis via water contaminated by cattle feces. If it is later proved that M. paratuberculosis or wood pigeon strains of M. avium158
are the responsible bacteria of disease, human infection would also occur through exposure to contaminated water (e.g., drinking
or aerosols).

V. HELICOBACTER PYLORI
The assumption that Helicobacter pylori is
waterborne needs to be substantiated. Half of
the world’s population is infected with H. pylori, making it a pathogen of potentially great
significance. Although in the majority of cases,
infection is harmless, many infected people
develop chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer disease,
or gastric cancer.159 Although all evidence
shows that H. pylori is well suited to attach to
the gastric mucus and the gastric epithelium, it
is difficult, however, to establish whether this
ecological niche is the only one. Studies suggest four transmission ways:160,161,162,163



1.

2.

3.

4.

By the fecal-oral route, the bacterium,
excreted by feces, might colonize water sources, becoming available to be
transmitted to man;
By the oral-oral route, H. pylori, which
colonizes dental plaque and saliva, may
be transmitted by saliva to other individuals (person to person transmission);
By the gastric-oral way, the typical modality of transmission in childhood, by
contaminated vomit;
Finally, by the gastric-gastric route, the
bacterium might be transmitted by endoscopic procedures.

The natural route of transmission is by
gastric juice, specifically as a result of epidemic vomiting in childhood.161,162 The different modalities of transmission may be
contemporaneously involved, however, because no one per se is able to explain the
widespread occurrence of H. pylori infection. Many studies have examined the possibility that H. pylori is waterborne. H. pylorispecific DNA was detected in sewage,164
surface water,165 and water supplies,166,167,168
although the organisms should be readily
inactivated by free chlorine.169 Actively respiring bacteria were found by monoclonal
antibody in the majority of surface and shallow groundwater samples tested in the U.S.170
The survival capacity of H. pylori is related
to the noncultivable coccoid form that may
persist up to 20 to 30 days in water165,170,171
and also in food.172
Studies of the prevalence or seroprevalence
suggested that drinking water might play some
role in infection with H. pylori,168 which is
unconfirmed by other works.173,174 More and
more data show that H. pylori DNA can be
detected by PCR from feces samples of infected individuals or patients with peptic ulcers,175,176,177,178 strongly suggesting fecal-tooral transmission. The detection of H. pylori
antigen in stools (Hp SA) brings new promise
for diagnosing H. pylori infection.179 The re-

sults obtained from H. pylori infection in an
experimental murine model also seem to support an oral-fecal route as the mode of transmission.180
However, many characteristics make
H. pylori a special bacterium in the world of
human pathogens. A long way remains for
the epidemiology of transmission, while the
environmental occurrences of this pathogen
are better defined.

VI. PATHOGENIC PROTOZOA
The most prevalent enteric protozoa
associated with waterborne disease include
Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium
parvum.127,181,182,183,184,185 The last species,
Cyclospora cayetanensis, Isospora belli, and
many Microsporidian species appear like
emerging pathogen protists.186,187,188,189

A. Giardia, Cryptosporidium
As a result of proliferation and evolution
in the intestinal tract, cysts (Giardia), oocysts (Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, Isospora) or infective spore (Microsporidia) are
produced and excreted in feces in a fully
infective form (Giardia, Cryptosporidium,
Microsporidia), or like immature stages
(Cyclospora, Isospora), which will shortly
complete their development in the environment acquiring their infectious power. Giardiasis has become the most common cause
of human waterborne disease in the U.S.
over the last 30 years. The first outbreak was
documented in 1965 at Aspen, Colorado.2
From then until 1996, 122 outbreaks involving 27,000 patients have been reported (Table
1).
The Apicomplexan Cryptosporidium has
only more recently been recognized as a
cause of waterborne outbreaks. The first
occurred in 1985 in Texas, with sewage-

383



TABLE 1
Enteric Protozoa and Waterborne-Disease Outbreaks

contaminated ground water as the source of
the infection.190 The outbreak in Milwaukee
was the largest documented waterborne incident ever in the U.S. since 1920. An estimated 403,246 cases of diarrhea were recorded over a span of 2 months, 4400 persons
were hospitalized and 69 deaths were
recensed among immunocompromised patients.191,192 From 1985 to 1996, 10 outbreaks
occurred in the U.S. that resulted in 419,914
cases of illness.184 Many outbreaks have also
been reported in the U.K.17 The size and
severity of waterborne cryptosporidiosis have
prompted investigations in depth about their
etiology and transmission. A striking result
was that many outbreaks of giardiasis and
cryptosporidiosis were found associated with
potable water, even when processing systems had been operated in accordance with
conventional standards of water treatment,
and while current microbiological standards
were met.183,181,193 Relying on Cryptosporidium as a model protozoan pathogen, investigations by Casemore,181 Rose,194 Current and Garcia,182 and Meinhart et al.183
attempted to clarify the transmission patterns for these diseases, and the problems to
be overcome in their management and monitoring for compliance. These are briefly reviewed below.

384

1.

2.

A broad variety of animal reservoirs,
including farm livestock, pets, and wildlife spread oocysts to man and the water
environment, particularly through agricultural and human effluents, compounded by an abundant rainfall. In addition, zoonotic and person-to-person
transmission occurs frequently. Oocysts
excreted by man and animals in large
numbers and in fully infective form constitute probably the main risk factor for
the spread of Cryptosporidium in aquatic
environment.183,194,195 The contamination
of water sources may lead to penetration
of water treatment plants and drinking
water supplies.17,183,196
Cryptosporidium oocysts possess a substantially elevated resistance against disinfectants used in water decontamination, with the exception of ozone and
chlorine dioxide.197,198 The physical removal of the parasite by coagulation
and filtration should, in theory, overcome the risk. All outbreaks of waterborne cryptosporidiosis that occurred
in the U.S. between 1985 and 1993,
however, hit communities where surface water supplies had been filtered
and where processing equipment met
federal and state standards. According



3.

to Gale,199 available evidence suggests
that many pathogenic microorganisms,
including cryptosporidia, are clustered
to some degree, even within small volumes, exposing some drinking water
consumers to much higher doses than
others. By assuming that enteric pathogens are randomly dispersed, current
models underestimate the risk of contracting infectious diseases.200 Modeling pathogen densities in drinking water obtained from source water, and
performance criteria for treatments, for
example, removal of efficiencies calls
for more information on the degree to
which treatment process (e.g., filtration
and coagulation) affect pathogen clustering. Also, the practice of recycling
filter backwash water can lead to breakthrough of oocysts into finished water.201 Finally, oocysts of Cryptosporidium can attach to and persit in
biofilms, then be released by sloughing
into the water system. By such mechanisms, some persons may be exposed
to infectious clusters, whereas the majority of consumers are not.
The infective dose of Cryptosporidium
in humans is not exactly known. Experiments in human volunteers202,203 obtained dose-response curves indicating
a median infective dose (ID50) of 132
oocysts and a minimum infective dose
of less than 30. A more recent study4
reported that the minimal infective dose
for immunocompetent volunteers can
vary between 10 and 1000 oocysts in
terms of the Cryptosporidium strain.
Studies using animal models showed
that as few as one to ten oocysts may
initiate an infection.183,204 However, IDs
vary strongly with the viability of oocysts that depends on incurred environmental stress, and on their virulence.
Nevertheless, the model of risk assessment developed by Perz et al.185 tends

4.

to demonstrate that transmission of oocysts may occur at low levels of the
pathogen in drinking water.205 With
respect to the Milwaukee epidemic,
mathematical modeling combined with
epidemiological data suggest that persons might indeed become infected after exposition to only one oocyst.192
Waterborne cases have been related,
however, in the absence of detectable
oocyst levels as in the Las Vegas outbreak.206
Recent molecular studies on Cryptosporidium genetic diversity are changing
basically the usual views about the epidemiological pattern of cryptosporidiosis. Until recently, C. parvum was
the species considered like responsible
for cryptosporidiosis both animals and
humans. Consequently, human cryptosporidiosis was usually considered a
typical zoonosis. In fact, on the basis of
isoenzymatic and molecular studies, two
genotypes (1 and 2) were revealed in
the species C. parvum. Genotype 1 was
found only in humans, whereas the
genotype 2 was found in both infected
humans and livestock. Moreover, crossinfection studies have shown that the
bovine genotype infects readily mice
and cattle, while the human genotype
does not.207,208,209 Multilocus analysis
indicated that the two genotypes are
genetically isolated.210,211 These results
suggest the existence of two C. parvum
separate transmission cycles: one that
may occur in humans or animals, and
other that exclusively passes through
humans. However, subsequent studies
are revealing a situation that is still more
complex. Thus, in addition to the two
major bovine and human genotypes,
six other genotypes were identified in
C. parvum isolates from domestic or
wild mammals (dog, mouse, pig, ferret,
marsupial, and monkey). Furthermore,

385



5.

the species C. meleagridis (from birds),
C. felis, and C. muris have been identified in human patients from the New or
the Old World.212 Indeed, as only molecular methods allow species or genotype identification of human, animal,
or environmental Cryptosporidium isolates,213 new Cryptosporidium taxonomy and cryptosporidiosis transmission patterns are being defined on
molecular bases.
In immunocompromised persons, particularly AIDS patients, symptoms of
illness are of a greater severity than in
immunocompetent people, which may
result in death of the former.185,183 Most
waterborne cryptosporidiosis outbreaks
have substantiated the more fulminant
reaction in AIDS patients. Among the
69 deaths in the Milwaukee outbreak
the majority of victims were AIDS patients.191

B. Cyclospora, Isospora,
Microsporidia
In addition to Giardia and Cryptosporidium,
Apicomplexa protozoa like Cyclospora, Isospora, and many Microsporidian species are
emerging as opportunistic pathogens and may
have waterborne routes of transmission. Overall, recently species have received attention because of their high infection rates in AIDS patients.186,188,214,215
Before 1995, the parasite C. cayetanensis
was primarily described in gastroenteritis
among children living in poor sanitary conditions and in travelers who had visited developing countries. Several outbreaks of
Cyclospora infection (or isolated cases) have
linked to waterborne transmission216,217,218
but in only one case216 were Cyclospora
oocysts demonstrated in drinking water. In
1996, the largest ever reported outbreak of
cyclosporiasis, affecting more than 1400

386

persons in North America219 was associated
with eating fresh raspberries from Guatemala. Most likely, fecal-polluted water, used
for spraying biocides on fruit, was the indirect source. Notwithstanding technologic
limitations, Cyclospora have been recovered
in limited numbers from water sources and
vegetables.188,191
Unlike Cryptosporidium, which has
many known animal hosts,220 Cyclosporalike organisms have been recovered from
ducks, chickens, dogs, and primates,187 perhaps having been passed through these hosts.
The Apicomplexa Isospora belli is among
the protozoa that most commonly causes
gastroenteritis in immunocompromised hosts,
such as patients with AIDS.221 The waterborne transmission of this parasite is possible and some epidemiological data suggest
this route.6
Microsporidia protists are obligate, intracellular, spore-forming protozoan parasites. Their host range is extensive and includes most invertebrates and all classes of
vertebrates. Five microsporidian genera have
been associated with human disease primarily in immunocompromised persons. They
are the following Enterocytozoon, Encephalitozoon, Trachipleistophora, Vittaformae,
and Nosema. Enterocytozoon bienensi, and
E. intestinalis are the most prevalent
Microsporidian parasite that cause gastrointestinal infection in AIDS patients;222,223
Microsporidia could also be a possible cause
of traveler’s diarrhea.224 Microsporidia may
disseminate to cause systemic infection as
well as ocular infection affecting cornea,
conjonctiva, liver, and biliary tract infection.
They have been recognized as a group of
pathogens that have potential for waterborne
transmission,14,225 and recently an evaluation
of methodologies was developed for the
detection of human pathogenic Microsporidia
in water.226 However, the study by Fournier
et al.227 shows a low rate of water contamination by E. bienensi, suggesting that the



risk of waterborne transmission to humans is
limited.

1.

VIII. VIRAL PATHOGENS
The modern era in environmental virology is characterized by the recognition of
hepatitis E virus (HEV) and the more recently
identified enteric virus capable of producing
waterborne outbreaks.228,229,230,231,232 More than
15 different groups of viruses, encompassing
more than 140 distinct types, can be found in
the human gut. They are excreted by patients
and find their way into sewage.
These viruses can be divided into three
categories with respect to their epidemiological significance (Table 2).

2.

3.

Some are either nonenteropathogenic,
or cause illness unrelated with the gut
epithelium; these include poliovirus,
coxsackieviruses A and B, echovirus,
hepatitis A and E viruses, and some
other human enteroviruses.
A relatively small group of viruses has
been incriminated as the causes of acute
gastroenteritis in humans, and fewer
still have been proven to be true etiologic agents; they include Norwalk virus and other caliciviruses, rotaviruses,
astroviruses, and some enteric adenoviruses.
A third category encompasses putative
enteropathogens, such as coronavirus,
enterovirus, torovirus, parvovirus, and
reovirus, for which a causal relationship
is still unproven.228

TABLE 2
Human Viral Pathogens or Putative Pathogens That Can Be
Transmitted by Fecally Polluted Water

387



The occurrence of a virus in a fecal specimen from a patient with gastroenteritis does
not prove that the virus is indeed the causative agent of diarrhea. The first step in an
attempted confirmation procedure relies on
establishing the identity of the virus by molecular biology (PCR), immunological assessment, or after it has grown in culture.
The second step in demonstrating causality
is based largely on guidelines developed from
epidemiological knowledge over the years.233

reported occurred in Kasspur, India, with an
estimated total of over 79,000 cases of disease.237 Another waterborne outbreak occurred in Delhi in 1955 to 1956 affected
approximately 29,300 persons.238 Such largescale hepatitis epidemics are invariably
waterborne and caused by HEV.239,240 Recent evidence indicates that HEV might also
be prevalent at a low level in Europe.241

B. Viral Gastroenteritis
A. Hepatitis
Hepatitis A virus (HAV) and Hepatitis E
virus (HEV) are associated with epidemics
and sporadic cases of hepatitis; they are transmitted by the fecal-oral route, and therefore
sewage polluted water may constitute a
source.17
The most established virus group associated with waterborne outbreaks is hepatitis
A virus. It results in widespread epidemics
and constitutes an important cause of asymptomatic infections in young children.
Mosley234 has summarized reports of 50
outbreaks from 1895 to 1964. Twenty-nine
of them show features supporting transmission by water. The highest incidence of
waterborne infectious hepatitis in the U.S.
has been in 1950 to 1960s and 1961 to 1970s
with, respectively, 18 outbreaks (757 cases
of illness) and 29 outbreaks (896 cases of
illness). It has declined since 1971 with 16
outbreaks in 1971 to 1980 and 11 outbreaks
in 1981 to 1990.2,8 Since 1991, only two
outbreaks caused by hepatitis virus A were
reported.235,236
Hepatitis E is much less widespread and
mostly confined to tropical and subtropical
areas. Infection can be more severe than
hepatitis A, with a high incidence of
cholestasis and increased mortality in pregnant women (20%). In 1991, the largest
waterborne outbreak of viral hepatitis E yet

388

The recognized viral agents of gastroenteritis include rotavirus, calicivirus, astrovirus,
and some enteric adenovirus. Rotaviruses are
classified by antigenic groups A, B, and C,
subgroup, and serotype. Group A rotaviruses
are the most common cause of diarrhea disease in infants and young children. Group C
rotaviruses, like group A strains, principally
cause diarrhea in young children, age 4 months
to 4 years. In contrast to other human
rotaviruses, group B rotaviruses are responsible predominantly for adult diarrheal disease, therefore designated as adult diarrhea
rotavirus or ADVR.
The most notorious of caliciviruses that
have been identified as a cause of gastroenteritis was the agent termed Norwalk virus. This
originated from an outbreak of epidemic gastroenteritis in an elementary school in Norwalk,
Ohio, in 1968. Many other related viruses were
later classified by IEM as small round structured viruses (SRSV). These induded the Hawaii, Snow Mountain, Montgomery Country,
Taunton, Otofuke, Sapporo, and the Osaka
agents. Most of these have been identified as
calicivirus, like over 50 other SRSVs. The
family Caliciviridae includes the following four
genera: vesivirus, lagovirus, Norwalk-like viruses (NLV), and Sapporo-like viruses
(SLV).242 Viruses in the NLV and SLV genera
have been found only in humans, but recent
data suggest that calves and pigs may be reservoir hosts of NLVs.232 Genetically, the human



caliciviruses (Hu CVs) contains at least three
genetic clusters or genogroups (GC), that is,
GGI, GGII NLV, and GGIII SLV.243 However, recently accumulated sequences of HuCV
strains indicate these genogroups can be further divided.244,245,246,247,248
Some SRSVs from infant stools with diarrhea were named astrovirus for the characteristic five- or six-pointed star configuration
that was evident on the surface of the viral
particles. To date, seven serotypes of human
astroviruses (HAstV) have been identified by
enzyme immuno-assays immunoelectron microscopy or reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR).249,250 Phylogenetic
analysis identified two genogroups A and B
correlated with serotypes.251
There are currently 47 serotypes of human adenoviruses, subdivided into six subgroups A through F. Many types of
adenoviruses have been isolated from stools,
but only types 40 and 41 have been consistently associated with gastroenteritis.252 The
two serotypes from the F subgroup are colloquially referred to enteric adenoviruses
(EAd).
Rotaviruses are one of the most important causes of infantile gastroenteritis in the
world. If untreated, rotavirosis can result in
severe dehydration and death, especially in
developing countries. Calicivirus and
astrovirus gastroenteritis are generally mild,
typically explosive but self-limited, with
symptoms lasting from 1 to 4 days after a
mean incubation time of 2 days. The clinical
picture of adenovirus gastroenteritis is similar to that of rotavirosis, but the incubation
period lasts 8 to 10 days.
In American statistics viral enteritis outbreaks of drinking water occur infrequently:
10 between 1971 and 1980, 15 between 1981
and 1990, 1 from 1991 to 1996. Because of
their low incidence they have not been included in Figure 2. However, it is more than
likely that a marked fraction of gastroenteritis
of unidentified origin (AGI) is indeed associ-

ated with a viral aetiology (Section II). In
recent years, the predominant part of SRSVs,
especially NLVs, was revealed in several
waterborne outbreak reports.253,254,255,256 Epidemiological studies of seroprevalence confirm that a large number of infections owing
to Norwalk viruses occur throughout the
year.257 Data from Lodder et al.229 suggest
that NLVs may exceed rotaviruses in importance as a cause of illness in the Netherlands.
The sensitive new molecular techniques based
on the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) available now have made
it possible to detect low levels of a wide
variety of enteric viruses. The results obtained154,231,258 also support epidemiological
data that suggests low-level transmission of
viruses by drinking water supplies.

C. Other Candidate Viruses
A relatively small group of viruses
has been incriminated as the causes of
acute gastroenteritis in humans, but while
most of them could be identified in fecal
specimens from patients with diarrhea,
not all were necessarily the etiologic
agent. Coronaviruses have been associated to humans gastroenteritis259 to neonatal necrotising entero-colitis260 and were
found regularly in the feces of patients
with nonbacterial gastroenteritis. 261 Despite 2 decades of research to assess their
causality, the results so far have been
inconclusive. Other viruses such as
picobirnaviruses, toroviruses, enteroviruses, reoviruses, and parvoviruses were
also identified in fecal specimens from
children and adults with gastroenteritis,
and HIV-infected patients. 233,249,261,262
However, their role as an etiologic agent
of diarrhea in the human population remains to be determined because many are
also found in healthy controls. More recently, immune response has been intro-

389



duced as a parameter in such investigations. 233
5.
D. Factors Affecting Viral Infections
Certain characteristics of enteric viruses
point to their potentially important role in
waterborne outbreaks.
1.

2.

3.

4.

390

More than 140 types of human or animal enteric viruses can be found in sewage (Table 2). Some of them have
proven enteropathogenicity, other just
being putative enteropathogens in humans.233 Most of the novel viral agents
(caliciviruses, astroviruses) found in
human diarrhea specimens are known
to cause gastroenteritis in different animal species.
Viruses, found in the feces of symptomatic or asymptomatic hosts attain
numbers up to 1010 infectious doses per
gram, excreted for 1 to 4 weeks. The
number of viruses currently detectable
in raw sewage can reach 102 to 103
infectious units per liter.
The wide distribution of enteric viruses
is demonstrated by sero-epidemiological surveys of North American populations: most of the adults testing positive.257
Many methods have been applied for
eliminating viruses from water; all
marred by the small size (20 to 100
nm), multiplicity of the virions, their
resistance being much higher than that
of bacteria, and various analytical shortcomings, such as the variation in microbial load of raw water, seasonal effects, and no random dispersion of
pathogens within large volumes. After
drinking water treatments, viruses are
still occasionally detectable.263 The
main limitation of water treatments is
that they may promote further cluster-

6.

ing of pathogens, exposing some water-drinking consumers to much higher
doses than others.
The number of viruses required to initiate infection can be estimated in animal models or human volunteers. Under appropriate conditions, as little as
one infectious particle of rotavirus can
trigger disease in animal264 or human
models.265 From studies in volunteers
with Norwalk and related viruses,266,267
astroviruses,268 enteroviruses,265 it appears that the number of virions needed
to infect man or animals is low in terms
of infectious units: Payment269 rightly
stated, “The cell culture infectious unit
is only a fraction of the real number of
infectious viruses”. For rotaviruses, the
proportion of culturable among electron microscopically detectable viruses
can be as high as 1:1000 or more.270 In
the most enteropathogenic bacteria the
ID50 are generally high, on the order of
106 to 108 except some species (cf. Section II).
In some waterborne outbreaks of gastroenteritis, viruses were isolated from
water that met current bacteriological
standards and contained an adequate
chlorine level.2,269,271,272,273 The isolation
of viruses from samples of “bacteriologically safe” potable water indicates
that bacteriological indicators are inadequate to monitor the occurrence of
viruses in water.

IX. GASTROENTERITIS OF
UNDETERMINED ETIOLOGY
In the majority of outbreaks of acute
gastroenteritis related in the U.S., the etiology could not be determined. Between 1940
to 1950, 213 outbreaks were recorded and
177 in 1970 to 1980. Because waterborne
outbreak reporting system is voluntary, the



differences observed in the frequency of their
occurrence might be largely attributed to poor
recording by State and Local Health Departments.2 Although, in principle, many incidents could have a bacterial or protozoan
etiology, many of these outbreaks could be
of viral origin.
A bacterial cause is relatively easy to
identify, while filtration and disinfecting
procedures effectively eliminate these agents.
Also, some outbreaks were clinically and
epidemiologically consistent with Norwalklike virus infection.9 Finally, the detection of
enteric viral pathogens was impossible at
that time. Even in 1970 to 1980 Giardia and
Cryptosporidium were only rarely recognized
as etiologic agents.

X. ENDEMIC GASTROENTERITIS
A few studies carried out in Canada and
later in France seem to point at endemic
infections associated with drinking water
complying with bacteriological standards.
Payment et al.274,275 in Montreal, followed a
randomized trial design in order to quantify
the health hazard, which remains after a standard, well-conducted treatment of bacteriologically contaminated surface water has
been completed. This study showed that
municipal tap water drinkers had a significantly higher rate of acute gastrointestinal
illnesses (35%) than those provided with a
domestic water filter, despite that the treatment used in the community water system
included predisinfecting, flocculation, sand
filtration, ozonation, and final chlorine or
chlorine dioxide disinfecting procedures
meeting the North American microbiological and physicochemical water quality standards. Payment et al.276 suggest that heterotrophic, potentially pathogenic agents, for
example, Bacillus spp., could be responsible
for these incidents. This assumption has never
been confirmed, however, while this dispro-

portionately high percentage of Bacillus in
the studied water supplies has not been found
by other authors.277
In order to assess the residual health risk
after mere disinfecting of piped water processed from ground water, an epidemiological study was conducted in France by Zmirou
et al.278 The crude incidence rate of diarrhea
was 1.4 times more frequent among children
drinking treated water than among controls.
The morbidity observed in this study comprises small sporadic outbreaks, along with
an endemic occurrence of acute gastrointestinal infection. Even when days with ‘epidemics’ were excluded from the analysis,
the routine occurrence of acute gastroenteritis events is still greater in relying on water,
suggesting that microbiological contamination is continuous.
In Vermont, where giardiasis was the
most common disease with annual incidence
rates higher than other states, waterborne
transmission was suggested to be an important cause of non-outbreak related cases;
indeed, rates of infection were highest in
persons that drank nonfiltered city water.279
These observations have been confirmed by
Fraser and Cook280 in New Zealand and by
Dennis et al.281 in New Hampshire, where
drinking untreated surface water and recreational water exposure were strongly associated with endemic giardiasis.
Cryptosporidium spp. probably present
enhanced endemic risks compared with Giardia spp., because of their more frequent
occurrence in surface water and higher resistance to water purification technology, including filtration. Perz et al.185 used a risk
assessment model to examine the potential
role of tap water in endemic infections with
Cryptosporidium spp. In comparing the
model output with surveillance data for
cryptosporidiosis, the analysis showed that
low-level transmission via tap water can represent an important exposure route for endemic Cryptosporidium infection.

391



Endemic transmission of protozoan infections results from the low infectious dose
of these organisms for man, and their heterogeneous distribution in clusters in treated
waters. Similarly, enteric viruses might be
involved in outbreaks of endemic waterborne
gastroenteritis. On the other hand, a similar
role for bacterial enteropathogens seems less
likely because their infectious dose is usually higher and their resistance to water purification treatments lower.
These data demonstrate that management
of endemic transmission of waterborne infections call for many supplemental epidemiological and analytical data. Such information has to be provided by prospective
studies on populations that have been exposed to different levels of pathogens, including control subjects. The outcome of
such investigations may well call for improvements in customarily applied water
purification treatments aiming at an unconditionally safe drinking water supply.

XI. TAKING INTO ACCOUNT
EXPOSURE OF
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED SUBJECTS
In all waterborne cryptosporidiosis outbreaks
it has been observed that immunocompromised
persons, such as AIDS patients, are at greater
risk than immunocompetent persons for developing severe illness, and for a potential lethal
outcome. In the Milwaukee epidemic,192 at least
69 fatalities were recorded amongst immunocompromised patients. In the outbreak that occurred in 1994 in Clark County (Nevada),193,282
63 of the 78 laboratory confirmed cases were in
HIV-infected adults, among whom 32 died.
Thus, current data indicate that during waterborne outbreaks immunocompromised persons,
such as AIDS patients, can acquire cryptosporidiosis more likely than immunocompetent
persons, while illness is more severe and life
threatening.

392

Not surprisingly, more recently reported
cases of cyclosporiasis, and diarrhea with Isospora or Microsporidia in stools include
overrepresentation of immunocompromised
patients with AIDS.184 This follows the pattern
of substantially enhanced risks for the classic
group of debilitated subjects: the very young,
old, pregnant, and immunocompromised
(YOPI) category.200 It is striking that YOPIs
seem to incur more risks, particularly from
exposure to protozoa, more specifically
Cryptosporidium spp. than from other pathogens. This prompted Public Health Authorities
to launch an information campaign targeted at
YOPIs recommending to take specific measures aiming at reducing the risk for waterborne cryptosporidiosis, including boiling water before use, using water filters, or bottled
water and avoiding swimming in lakes, rivers,
or public swimming pools. This does not exempt these authorities, however, from the obligation to manage health risks associated with
low-level oocyst contamination of fully treated
drinking water. Such efforts should be guided
by surveillance systems and by epidemiologic
studies designed for assessing the public health
significance of low levels of Cryptosporidium
oocysts.

SUMMARY
Many classes of pathogens excreted in
feces are able to initiate waterborne infections. There are bacterial pathogens, including enteric and aquatic bacteria, enteric viruses, and enteric protozoa, which are
strongly resistant in the water environment
and to most disinfectants. The infection dose
of viral and protozoan agents is lower than
bacteria, in the range of one to ten infectious
units or oocysts.
Waterborne outbreaks of bacterial origin
(particularly typhoid fever) in the developing countries have declined dramatically from
1900s. Therefore, some early bacterial agents



such as Shigella sonnei remains prevalent
and new pathogens of fecal origin such as
zoonotic C. jejuni and E. coli O157:H7 may
contaminate pristine waters through wildlife
or domestic animal feces. The common feature of these bacteria is the low inoculum (a
few hundred cells) that may trigger disease.
The emergence in early 1992 of serotype
O139 of V. cholerae with epidemic potential
in Southeast Asia suggests that other serotypes than V. cholerae O1 could also getting
on epidemic.
Some new pathogens include environmental bacteria that are capable of surviving
and proliferating in water distribution systems. Other than specific hosts at risk, the
general population is refractory to infection
with ingested P. aeruginosa. The significance of Aeromonas spp. in drinking water
to the occurrence of acute gastroenteritis
remains a debatable point and has to be evaluated in further epidemiological studies.
Legionella and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) are environmental pathogens
that have found an ecologic niche in drinking and hot water supplies. Numerous studies have reported Legionnaires’ disease
caused by L. pneumophila occurring in residential and hospital water supplies. M. avium
complex frequently causes disseminated infections in AIDS patients and drinking water
has been suggested as a source of infection;
in some cases the relationship has been
proven.
More and more numerous reports show
that Helicobacter pylori DNA can be amplified from feces samples of infected patients,
which strongly suggests fecal-to-oral transmission. Therefore, it is possible that H. pylori infection is waterborne, but these assumptions need to be substantiated.
Giardiasis has become the most common cause of human waterborne disease in
the U.S. over the last 30 years. However, as
a result of the massive outbreak of waterborne cryptosporidiosis in Milwaukee, Wis-

consin, affecting an estimated 403,000 persons, there is increasing interest in the epidemiology and prevention of new infection
disease caused by Cryptosporidium spp. as
well as monitoring water quality. The transmission of Cryptosporidium and Giardia
through treated water supplies that meet water
quality standards demonstrates that water
treatment technologies have become inadequate, and that a negative coliform no longer
guarantees that water is free from all pathogens, especially from protozoan agents. Substantial concern persists that low levels of
pathogen occurrence may be responsible for
the endemic transmission of enteric disease.
In addition to Giardia and Cryptosporidium,
some species of genera Cyclospora, Isospora, and of family Microsporidia are emerging as opportunistic pathogens and may have
waterborne routes of transmission.
More than 15 different groups of viruses,
encompassing more than 140 distinct types
can be found in the human gut. Some cause
illness unrelated with the gut epithelium, such
as Hepatitis A virus (HAV) and Hepatitis E
virus (HEV). Numerous large outbreaks have
been documented in the U.S. between 1950
and 1970, and the incidence rate has strongly
declined in developing countries since the
1970s. Hepatitis E is mostly confined to tropical and subtropical areas, but recent reports
indicate that it can occur at a low level in
Europe. A relatively small group of viruses
have been incriminated as causes of acute
gastroenteritis in humans and fewer have
proven to be true etiologic agents, including
rotavirus, calicivirus, astrovirus, and some
enteric adenovirus. These enteric viruses have
infrequently been identified as the etiologic
agents of waterborne disease outbreaks, because of inadequate diagnostic technology,
but many outbreaks of unknown etiology
currently reported are likely due to viral agents.
Actually, Norwalk virus and Norwalk-like
viruses are recognized as the major causes of
waterborne illnesses world-wide.

393



The global burden of infectious waterborne disease is considerable. Reported numbers highly underestimate the real incidence
of waterborne diseases. The most striking
concern is that enteric viruses such as
caliciviruses and some protozoan agents, such
as Cryptosporidium, are the best candidates
to reach the highest levels of endemic
transmission, because they are ubiquitous in
water intended for drinking, being highly
resistant to relevant environmental factors,
including chemical disinfecting procedures.
Other concluding concerns are the enhanced
risks for the classic group of debilitated subjects (very young, old, pregnant, and
immunocompromised individuals) and the
basic requirement of to take specific measures aimed at reducing the risk of waterborne infection diseases in this growing,
weaker population.

REFERENCES
1. Bradley, D.J. (1977) Improvements of rural
domestic water supplies. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London Series B 199, 37–47.
2. Craun, G.F. (1986) Waterborne Diseases in
the United States. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida.
3. Moe, C.L. (1997) Waterborne transmission
of infectious agents. In: Manual of Environmental Microbiology. Hurst, C.J., Knudsen,
G.R., McInerney, M.J., Stetzenbach, L.D., and
Walter, M.V., Eds. pp. 136–153. Washington: ASM Press.
4. Okhuysen, P.C., Chappell, C.L., Crabb, J.H.,
Sterling, C.R., and DuPont, H.L. (1999) Virulence of three distinct Cryptosporidium
parvum isolates for healthy adults. Journal of
Infectious Diseases 180, 1275–1281.
5. WHO. World Health Report. 1998. Conquering suffering-enriching humanity. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
6. Ford, T.E. 1999. Microbiological safety of
drinking water: United States and global per-

394

spectives. Environmental Health Perspectives
107, 191.
7. Craun, G.F. (1990) Methods for the investigation and prevention of waterborne disease
outbreaks. Cincinnati: Environmental Protection Agency.
8. Craun, G.F. (1992) Waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States of America: causes
and prevention. Rapport trimestriel de
statistiques sanitaires mondiales 45, 192.
9. Kaplan, J.E., Gary, G.W., Baron, R.C., Singh,
N., Schonberger, L.B., Feldman, R. and
Greenberg, H.B. (1982) Epidemiology of
Norwalk gastroenteritis and the role of
Norwalk virus in outbreaks of acute nonbacterial gastroenteritis. Annals of Internal Medicine 96, 756.
10. Anon. (1999) Waterborne pathogens. AWWA
Manual of water practices, M48. American
Water Works Association, Denver, Colorado.
11. LeChevallier, M.W., Abbaszadegan, M.,
Camper, A.K., Hurst,C.J., Izaguirre, G.,
Marshall, M.M., Naumovitz, D., Payment, P.,
Rice,E.W., Rose, J., Schaub, S., Slifko, T.R.,
Smith, D.B., Smith, H.V., Sterling, C.R. and
Stewardt, M. (1999) Committee report:
Emerging pathogens - viruses, protozoa, and
algal toxins. Journal of the American Water
Works Association 91, 110–121.
12. LeChevallier, M.W., Abbaszadegan, M.,
Camper, A.K., Hurst,C.J., Izaguirre, G.,
Marshall, M.M., Naumovitz, D., Payment, P.,
Rice,E.W., Rose, J., Schaub, S., Slifko, T.R.,
Smith, D.B., Smith, H.V., Sterling, C.R., and
Stewardt, M. (1999) Committee report:
Emerging pathogens - bacteria. Journal of the
American Water Works Association 91, 101–
109.
13. LeChevallier, M.W., Abbazaszadegan, M.,
Camper, A.K., Izaguire, G., Stewart, M.,
Naumovitz, D., Marshall, M., Sterling, C.R.,
Payment, P., Rice, E.W., Hurst, C.J., Schaub,
S. Slifko, T.R., Rose, J.B., Smith, H.V. and
Smith, D.B. (1999) Emerging pathogens:
names to know and bugs to watch out for. In:
Identifying future drinking water contaminants. pp. 139–172. Washington DC: National
Research Council.



14. Szewzyk, U., Szewzyk, R., Manz, W., and
Schleifer, K. (2000) Microbiological safety
of drinking water. Annual Review of Microbiology 54, 81–127.
15. Galbraith, N.S. (1994) A historical review of
microbial disease spread by water in England
and Wales. In Water and Public Health. Noah,
N., Stanwell-Smith, R., Eds., pp. 15–37. London: Smith-Gordon & Co. Golding AMB.
16. Stenström, T.A. (1994) A review of waterborne
outbreaks of gastroenteritis in Scandinavia. In
Water and Public Health. Noah, N. and Stanwell
Smith, Rds., R. pp. 137–143. London: Smith
Gordon & Co. Golding AMB.
17. Hunter, P.R. (1997) Waterborne disease.
Epidemiology and Ecology. Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons. 372 p.
18. Morris, R.D. and Levin, R. (1995) Estimating
the incidence of waterborne infectious disease
related to drinking water in the United States.
In Assessing and managing health risks from
drinking water contamination: approaches and
applications. Reichard, E.G. and Zapponi, G.A.,
Eds., pp. 75–88. Wallingford, UK: International Association of Hydrological Sciences.
19. Furtado, C., Adak, G.K., Stuart, J.M., Wall,
P.G., Evans, H.S., and Casemore, D.P. (1998)
Outbreaks of waterborne infectious intestinal
disease in England and Wales, 1992–5. Epidemiology and Infection 121, 109–119.
20. Melby, K., Gondrosen, B., Gregusson, S.,
Ribe, H., and Dahl, O.P. (1991) Waterborne
campylobacteriosis in northern Norway. International Journal of Food Microbiology 12,
151–156.
21. Rautelin, H. and Hanninen, M.L. (2000)
Campylobacters: the most common bacterial
enteropathogens in the Nordic countries. Annals of Medicine 32, 440–445.
22. Rautelin, H., Koota, K., von Essen, R.,
Jahkola, M., Siitonen, A., and Kosunen, T.U.
(1990) Waterborne Campylobacter jejuni
epidemic in a Finnish hospital for rheumatic
diseases. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious
Diseases 22, 321–326.
23. Alary, M. and Nadeau, D. (1990) An outbreak of Campylobacter enteritis associated

with a community water supply. Canadian
Journal of Public Health 81, 268–271.
24. Millson, M., Bokhout, M., Carlson, J.,
Spielberg, L., Aldis, R., Borczyk, A., and
Lior, H. (1991) An outbreak of Campylobacter
jejuni gastroenteritis linked to meltwater contamination of a municipal well. Canadian
Journal of Public Health 82, 27–31.
25. Stehr-Green, J.K., Nicholls, C., McEwan, S.,
Payne, A., and Mitchell, P. (1991) Waterborne outbreak of Campylobacter jejuni in
Christchurch: the importance of a combined
epidemiologic and microbiologic investigation. New Zealand Medical Journal 104, 356–
358.
26. Tauxe, R.V., Hargrett-Bean,N., Patton, C.M.,
and Wachsmuth, I.K. (1988) Campylobacter
isolates in the United States, 1982–1986.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 37,
1–13.
27. Taylor, D.N., McDermott ,K.T., Little, J.R., Wells,
J.G., and Blaser, M.J. (1983) Campylobacter
enteritis from untreated water in the Rocky Mountains. Annals of Internal Medicine 99, 38–40.
28. Brennhovd, O., Kapperud, G., and Langeland, G.
(1992) Survey of thermotolerant Campylobacter
spp. and Yersinia spp. in three surface water
sources in Norway. International Journal of Food
Microbiology. 15, 327–338.
29. Popowski, J., Lekowska-Kochaniak, A., and
Korsak, D. (1997) The incidence of heat tolerant Campylobacter in rivers and lakes of
the Warsaw region. Roczniki Panstwowego
Zakladu Higiene 48, 253–262.
30. Obiri-Danso, K. and Jones, K. (1999) Distribution and seasonality of microbial indicators
and thermophilic campylobacters in two freshwater bathing sites on the River Lune in northwest England. Journal of Applied Microbiology 87, 822–832.
31. Megraud, F. and Serceau, R. (1990) Search
for Campylobacter species in the public water supply of a large urban community.
Zentralblatt fur Hygiene und Umweltmedizin
189, 536–542.
32. Stanley, K., Cunningham, R., and Jones, K.
(1998) Isolation of Campylobacter jejuni from

395



groundwater. Journal of Applied Microbiology 85, 187–191.
33. Buswell, C.M., Herlihy, Y.M. Lawrence L.M.,
McGuiggan, J.T., Marsh, P.D., Keevil, C.W.,
and Leach, S.A. (1998) Extended survival and
persistence of Campylobacter spp. in water and
aquatic biofilms and their detection by immunofluorescent-antibody and –rRNA staining. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 64, 733–741.
34. Thomas, C., Hill, D.J., and Mabey, M. (1999)
Evaluation of the effect of temperature and
nutrients on the survival of Campylobacter
spp. in water microcosms. Journal of Applied
Microbiology 86, 1024–1032.
35. Rollins, D.M. and Colwell, R.R. (1986) Viable but nonculturable stage of Campylobacter
jejuni and its role in survival in natural, aquatic
environment. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 58, 531–538.
36. Jones, D.M., Sutcliffe, E.M., and Curry, A.
(1991) Recovery of viable but non-culturable
Campylobacter jejuni. Journal of General
Microbiology137, 2477–2482.
37. Medema, G.J., Schets, F.M., van de Giessen,
A.W., and Havelaar, A.H. (1992) Lack of
colonization of 1-day-old chicks by viable,
non-culturable Campylobacter jejuni. Journal of Applied Bacteriology 72, 512–516.
38. Cappelier, J.M., Minet, J., Magras, C.,
Colwell, R.R., and Federighi, M. (1999) Recovery in embryonated eggs of viable but
nonculturable Campylobacter jejuni cells and
maintenance of ability to adhere to HeLa cells
after resuscitation. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65, 5154–5157.
39. Talibart, R., Denis, M., Castillo, A., Cappelier,
J.M., and Erme, G. (2000) Survival and recovery of viable but noncultivable forms of
Campylobacter in aqueous microcosm. International Journal of Food Microbiology 55,
263–267.
40. Jacob, J., Woodward, D., Feuerpfeil, I., and
Johnson, W.M. (1998) Isolation of Arcobacter
butzleri in raw water and drinking water treatment plants in Germany. Zentralblatt fur
Hygiene und Umweltmedizin 201, 189–198.
41. Rice, E.W., Rodgers, M.R., Wesley, I.V.,
Johnson, C.H., and Tanner, S.A. (1999)

396

Isolation of Arcobacter butzleri from ground
water. Letters of Applied Microbiology 28, 31–
35.
42. Lerner, J., Brumberger, V., and Preac-Mursic,
V. (1994) Severe diarrhea associated with
Arcobacter butzleri. European Journal of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases
13, 660–662.
43. Riley, L.W., Remis, R.S., Helgerson, S.D.,
McGee, H.B., Wells, J., Davis, B.R., Hebert,
R.J., Olcott, E.S., Johnson, L.M., Hargrett,
N.T., Blake, P.A., and Cohen, M.L. (1983)
Hemorrhagic colitis associated with a rare
Escherichia coli serotype. New England Journal of Medicine 308, 681–685.
44. Chart, H. (2000) VTEC enteropathogenicity.
Journal of Applied Microbiology. SS. 88, 12S23S.
45. Rice, E.W., Johnson, C.H., Wild, D.K., and
Reasoner, D.J. (1992) Survival of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in drinking water associated with a waterborne disease outbreak of
hemorrhagic colitis. Letters of Applied Microbiology 15, 38–40.
46. Wang, G., Doyle, M.P. (1998) Survival of
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7
in water. Journal of Food Protection 61, 662–
667.
47. Swerdlow, D.L., Woodruff, B.A., Brady,
R.C., Griffin, P.M., Tippen, S., Donnell,
H.D.J, Geldreich, E., Payne, B.J., Meyer,
A.J., Wells, J.G. et al. (1992) A waterborne
outbreak in Missouri of Escherichia coli
O157:H7 associated with bloody diarrhea
and death. Annals of Internal Medicine 117,
812–819.
48. Chalmers, R.M., Aird, H., and Bolton, F.J.
(2000) Waterborne Escherichia coli O157.
Journal of Applied Microbiology Symposium
Supplement 88, 124S–132S.
49. DuPont, H.L., Levine, M.M., Hornick, R.B.,
and Formal, S.B. (1989) Inoculum size in
shigellosis and implications for expected mode
of transmission. Journal of Infectious Diseases 159, 1126–1128.
50. Robinson, D.A. 1981. Infective dose of
Campylobacter jejuni in milk. British Medical Journal 282, 1584.



51. Black, R.E., Levine, M.M., and Clements, M.L.
et al. (1988) Experimental Campylobacter
jejuni infection in humans. Journal of Infectious Diseases 157, 472–479.
52. Griffin, P.M. and Tauxe, R.V. (1991) The
epidemiology of infections caused by Escherichia coli O157:H7, other enterohemorrhagic
E. coli, and the associated hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Epidemiologic Reviews 13, 60–
98.
53. Schieman, D.A. (1990) Yersinia enterocolitica
in drinking water. In Drinking water microbiology. McFeters, G.A., Ed., pp. 322–340. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
54. Eden, K.V., Rosenberg, M.L., Stoopler, M.,
Wood, B.T., Highsmith, A.K., et al. (1977)
Waterborne gastrointestinal illness at a ski
resort. Public Health Reports 92, 245–250.
55. Ostroff, S.M., Kapperud, G., Hutwagner, L.C.,
Nesbakken, T., Bean, N.H. et al. (1994)
Sources of sporadic Yersinia enterocolitica
infections in Norway: a prospective case-control study. Epidemiology and Infection 112,
133–141.
56. Saebo, A., Kapperud, G., Lassen, J., and
Waage, J. (1994) Prevalence of antibodies to
Yersinia enterocolitica O:3 among Norwegian military recruits: association with risk
factors and clinical manifestations. European
Journal of Epidemiology 10, 749–755.
57. Satterthwaite, P., Pritchard, K., Floyd, D.,
and Law, B. (1999) A case-control study of
Yersinia enterocolitica infections in Auckland.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 23, 482–485.
58. Brenner, D.J. (1992) Introduction to the family Enterobacteriaceae. In The Prokaryotes.
2nd ed. Vol III. 142. Balows, A., Trüper,
H.G., Dworkin, M., Harder, W., and Schleifer,
K.H., Eds., pp. 2673–2696.
59. Kapperud, G. (1977) Yersinia enterocolitica
and Yersinia-like microbes isolated from mammals and water in Norway and Denmark. Acta
Pathologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica
85, 129–135.
60. Langeland, G. (1983) Yersinia enterocolitica
and Yersinia enterocolitica-like bacteria in
drinking-water and sewage sludge. Acta

Pathologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica
91, 179–185.
61. Aleksic, S. and Bockem H.L.J. (1988) Serological and biochemical characteristics of 416
Yersinia strains from well water and drinking-water plants in the Federal Republic of
Germany: lack of evidence that these strains
are of public health importance. Zentralblatt
fur Bakteriologie, Mikrobiologie and Hygiene,
Reihe B 185, 527–533.
62. Chakraborty, S., Mukhopadhyay, A.K.,
Bhadra, R.K., Ghosh, A.N., Mitra, R.,
Shimada, T., Yamasaki, S., Faruque, S.M.,
Takeda, Y., Colwell, R.R., and Nair, G.B.
(2000) Virulence genes in environmental
strains of Vibrio cholerae. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66, 4022–4028.
63. Faruque, S.M., Albert, M.J., and Mekalanos,
J.J. (1998) Epidemiology, genetics, and ecology of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 62,1301–
1314.
64. Basu, A., Garg, P., Datta, S., Chakraborty, S.,
Bhattacharya, T., Khan, A., Ramamurthy, S.,
Bhattacharya, S.K., Ymasaki, S., Takeda, Y.,
and Nair, G.B. (2000) Vibrio cholerae O139 in
Calcutta, 1992–1998: incidence, antibiograms
and genotypes. Emergency Infectious Disease
6, 139–147.
65. Reeves, P.R. and Lan, R. (1998) Cholera in
the 1990s. British Medical Bulletin 54, 611–
623.
66. Beltran, P., Delgado, G., Navarro, A., Trujillo,
F., Selander, R.K., and Cravioto, A. (1999)
Genetic diversity and population structure of
Vibrio cholerae. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 37, 581–590.
67. Faruque, S.M., Saha, M.N., Asadulghani, Bag,
P.K., Bhadra, R.K., Bhattacharya, S.K., Sacl,
R.B., Takeda, Y., and Nair, G.B. (2000) Genomic diversity among Vibrio cholerae O139
strains isolated in Bangladesh and India between 1992 and 1998. FEMS Microbiology
Letters 184, 279–284.
68. Jiang, S.C., Matte, M., Matte, G., Huq, A.,
and Colwell, R.R. (2000) Genetic diversity of
clinical and environmental isolates of Vibrio
cholerae determined by amplified fragment
length polymorphism fingerprinting. Applied

397



and Environmental Microbiology 66, 148–
153.

ments. Revista Panamericana de Salud Publica 1, 3–8.

69. Craun, G.F., Swerdlow, D., Tauxe, R., Clark,
R., Fox, K., Geldreich, E., Reasoner, D., and
Rice, E. (1991) Prevention of waterborne
cholera in the United States. Journal of the
American Water Works Association 83, 40–
47.

78. Jesudason, M.V., Balaji, V., Mukindan, U.,
and Thomson, C.J. (2000) Ecological study
of Vibrio cholerae in Vellore. Epidemiology
and Infection 124, 201–206.

70. Onishchenko, G.G., Toporkov, V.P., Prometnoi,
V.I., and Naumov, A.V. (1995) The cholera
epidemic in mountainous regions of Dagestan
in relation to the probable role of the water
factor in its spread. Zhurnal Mikrobiologii,
Epidemiologii i Immunobiologii 2, 64–69.
71. Maggi, P., Carbonara, S., Fico, C., Santantonio,
T., Romanelli, C., Sforza, E., and Pastore, G.
(1997) Epidemiological, clinical and therapeutic evaluation of the Italian cholera epidemic in
1994. European Journal of Epidemiology 13,
95–97.
72. Clark, C.G., Kravetz, A.N., Alekseenko, V.V.,
Krendelev, Y., and Johnson, W.M. (1998)
Microbiological and epidemiological investigation of cholera epidemic in Ukraine during
1994 and 1995. Epidemiology and Infection
121, 1–13.
73. Cavalieri d’oro L. et al. (1999) Vibrio cholerae
outbreak in Italy. Emerging Infectious Diseases 5, 300–301.
74. Albert ,M.J., Neira, M., and Motarjemi, Y.
(1997) The role of food in the epidemiology
of cholera. World Health Statistics 50, 111–
118.
75. Franco, A.A., Fix, A.D., Prada, A., Paredes,
E., Palomino, J.C., Wright, A.C., Johnson,
J.A., McCarter, R., Guerra, H., and Morris,
J.G. Jr. (1997) Cholera in Lima, Peru, correlates with prior isolation of Vibrio cholerae
from the environment. American Journal of
Epidemiology 146, 1067–1075.

79. Uchiyama, H. (1998) A number of Vibrio
cholerae non-O1 isolated from aquatic environments. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 72, 720–
726.
80. Thomson, C.J., Jesudason, M.V., Balaji, V.,
Malathi, B., Mukundan, U., and Amyes, S.G.
(1998) The prevalence of Vibrio spp. in drinking water and environmental samples in
Vellore South India. Epidemiology and Infection 121, 67–76.
81. Stiles, M.E. (1989) Less recognized or presumptive foodborne pathogenic bacteria. In:
Foodborne Bacterial Pathogens. Doyle, M.P.,
Ed., pp. 673–733. New York: Marcel Dekker
Inc.
82. Leclerc, H. and Oger, C. (1974) Les eaux usées
des hôpitaux et leur importance épidémiologique.
Revue Epidémiologique de Médecine Sociale et
Santé Publique 22, 185–198.
83. Leclerc, H. and Oger, C. (1975) Les eaux
usées des abattoirs et leur importance
épidémiologique. Revue Epidémiologique de
Médecine Sociale et Santé Publique 23, 429–
444.
84. Williams, E.P. and Cameron, B.A. (1897) Upon
general infection by Bacillus pyocyaneus in
children. Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology 3, 344–351.
85. Hunter, C.A. and Ensign, P.R. (1947) An
epidemic of diarrhea in a newborn nursery
caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. American Journal of Public Health 37, 1166–1169.
86. Florman, A.L. and Schifrin, N. (1950) Observations on a small outbreak of infantile diarrhea associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Journal of Pediatrics 36, 758–766.

76. Colwell, R.R. and Huq, A. (1994) Vibrios in the
environment: viable but non-culturable Vibrio
cholerae. In Vibrio cholerae and cholera: molecular to global perspectives. Wachsmuth,
I.K., Blake, P.A., and Olsvik, O., Eds., pp.117–
133. Washington, D.C.: ASM Press.

87. Henderson, A., MacLaurin, J., and Scott, J.M.
1969. Pseudomonas in a Glasgow baby unit.
Lancet 1, 316–317.

77. Borroto, R.J. (1997) Ecology of Vibrio
cholerae serogroup O1 in aquatic environ-

88. Dold, H. (1918) On pyocyaneus sepsis and
intestinal infections in Shanghai due to Bacil-

398



lus pyocyaneus. Chinese Medical Journal 32,
435.

nus Aeromonas. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 4, 397–410.

89. Hardalo, C. and Edberg, S.C. (1997) Pseudomonas aeruginosa: assessment of risk from
drinking water. Critical Reviews in Microbiology 23, 47–75.

98. Janda, J.M. and Abbott, S.L. (1998) Evolving
concepts regarding the genus Aeromonas: an
expanding panorama of species, disease presentations, and unanswered questions. Clinical Infectious Diseases 27, 332–344.

90. Lepow, M.L. (1994) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
colonization and infection of the gastrointestinal tract. In Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections and treatment. Baltch, A.L. and Smith,
R.P. Eds., pp. 421–440. New York: Marcel
Dekker.
91. Buck, A.C. and Cook, E.M. (1969) The fate
of ingested Pseudomonas aeruginosa in normal persons. Journal of Medical Microbiology 2, 521–525.
92. Hoadley, A. (1977) Potential health hazards
associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in
water. In Bacterial indicators/Health hazards
associated with water. Hoadley, A. and Dutka,
B.J. Eds., pp. 80. Philadelphia: ASTM.
93. Rusin, P.A., Rose, J.B., Haas, C.N., and Gerba,
C.P. (1997) Risk assessment of opportunistic
bacterial pathogens in drinking water. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology 152, 57–83.
94. Boukadida, J., de Montalembert, M., Gaillard,
J.L., Gobin, J., Grimont, F., Girault, D., Véron,
M., and Berche, P. (1991) Outbreak of gut
colonization by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in
immunocompromised children undergoing
total digestive decontamination: analysis by
pulsed-field electrophoresis. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 29, 2068–2071.
95. Römling, U., Wingender, J., Müller, H., and
Tümmler, B. (1994) A major Pseudomonas
aeruginosa clone common to patients and
aquatic habitats. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 60, 1734–1738.
96. Foca, M., Jakob, K., Whittier, S., Della Latta,
Ph.D., Factor, S., Rubenstein, D., and Saiman,
L. (2000) Endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in a neonatal intensive care unit.
New England Journal of Medicine 343, 695–
700.
97. Janda, J.M. (1991) Recent advances in the
study of the taxonomy, pathogenicity, and
infectious syndromes associated with the ge-

99. Albert, M.J., Ansaruzzaman, M., Talukder,
K.A., Chopra, A.K., Kuhn, I., Rahman, M.,
Faruque, A.S., Islam, M.S., Sack, R.B., and
Mollby, R. (2000) Prevalence of enterotoxin
genes in aeromonas spp. isolated from children with diarrhea, healthy controls, and the
environment. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 38, 3785–3790.
100. Farmer, J.J., Arduino, M.J., and HickmanBrenner, F.W. (1992) The genera Aeromonas
and Plesiomonas. In: The Prokaryotes. 2nd
edition. Balows, A.,Trüper, G., Dworkin, M.,
Harder, W. and Schleifer, K.H. Eds., New
York: Springer-Verlag.
101. Morgan, D.R., Johnson, P.C., Dupont, H.L.,
Satterwhite, T.K., and Wood, L.V. (1985)
Lack of correlation between known virulence
properties of Aeromonas hydrophila and
enteropathogenicity for humans. Infection and
Immunity 50, 62–65.
102. Hazen, T.C., Fliermans, C.B., Hirsch, R.P.,
and Esch, G.W. (1978) Prevalence and distribution of Aeromonas hydrophila in the United
States. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 36, 731–738.
103. Schubert, R.H. (1991) Aeromonads and their
significance as potential pathogens in water.
Journal of Applied Bacteriology Symposium
Supplement 70, 131S-135S.
104. Kersters, I., Van Vooren, L., Huys G., Janssen,
P., Kersters, K., and Verstraete, W. (1995)
Influence of temperature and process technology on the occurrence of Aeromonas species and hygienic indicator organisms in drinking water production plants. Microbial
Ecology 30, 203–218.
105. Pettibone, G.W. (1998) Population dynamics of
Aeromonas spp. in an urban river watershed.
Journal of Applied Microbiology 85, 723–730.
106. Seidler, R.J., Allen, D.A., Lockman, H.,
Colwell, R.R., Joseph, S.W., and Daily, O.P.

399



(1980) Isolation, enumeration and characterization of Aeromonas from polluted waters
encountered in diving operations. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 39, 1010–1018.
107. Araujo, R.M., Arribas, R.M., Lucena, F., and
Pares, R. (1989) Relation between Aeromonas
and faecal coliforms in fresh waters. Journal
of Applied Bacteriology 67,213–217.
108. Kersters, I., Huys, G., Van Duffel, H.,
Vancanneyt, M., Kersters, K., and Verstraete,
W. (1996) Survival potential of Aeromonas
hydrophila in freshwaters and nutrient-poor
waters in comparison with other bacteria.
Journal of Applied Bacteriology 80, 266–276.
109. Leclerc, H. and Buttiaux, R. (1962) Fréquence
des Aeromonas dans les eaux d’alimentation.
Annales de l’Institut Pasteur 103, 97–100.
110. Burke, V., Robinson, J., Gracey, M., Peterson,
D., and Partridge, K. (1984) Isolation of
Aeromonas hydrophila from a Metropolitan
water supply: seasonal correlation with clinical isolates. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 48, 361–366.
111. Havelaar, A.H., Versteegh, J.F.M., and During, M. (1990) The presence of Aeromonas in
drinking water supplies in the Netherlands.
Zentralblatt fur Hygiene 190, 236–256.
112. Krovacek, K., Faris, A., Baloda, S.B.,
Lindberg, T., Peterz, M., and Mansson, I.
(1992) Isolation and virulence profiles of
Aeromonas spp. from different municipal
drinking water supplies in Sweden. Food
Microbiology 9, 215–222.
113. Kühn, I., Allestram, G., Huys, G., Janssen, P.,
Kersters, K., Krovacek, K. and Stenstrom,
T.A. (1997) Diversity, persistence, and virulence of Aeromonas strains isolated from
drinking water distribution systems in Sweden. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 63, 2708–2715.
114. Havelaar, A.H., Schets, F.M., Van Silfhout,
A., Jansen, W.H., Wieten, G., and Van Der
Kooij, D. (1992) Typing of Aeromonas strains
from patients with diarrhoea and from drinking water. Journal of Applied Bacteriology
72, 435–344.
115. Schubert, R.H. (2000) Intestinal cell adhesion and maximum growth temperature of

400

psychrotrophic aeromonads from surface
water. International Journal of Hygiene and
Environmental Health 203, 83–85.
116. Hookey, J.V., Saunders, N.A., Fry, N.K.,
Birtles, R.J., and Harrison, T.G. (1996) Phylogeny of Legionellaceae on small-subunit
ribosomal DNA sequences and proposal of
Legionella lytica comb. nov. for Legionella
like amoebal pathogens. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 46, 526–531.
117. States, S.J., Wadowsky, R.M., Kuchta, J.M.,
Wolford, R.S., Conley, L.F., and Yee, R.B.
(1990) Legionella in drinking water. In Drinking Water Microbiology. McFeters, G.A., Ed.,
pp. 340–368. New York: Springer Verlag.
118. Bates, M.N., Maas, E., Martin, T., Harte, D.,
Grubner, M., and Margolin, T. (2000) Investigation of the prevalence of Legionella species in domestic hot water systems. New
Zealand Medical Journal 113, 218–220.
119. Martinelli, F., Caruso, A., Moschini, L., Turano,
A., Scarcella, C., and Speziani, F. (2000) A
comparison of Legionella pneumophila occurrence in hot water tanks and instantaneous
devices in domestic, nosocomial, and community environments. Current Microbiology 41,
374–376.
120. Kool, J.L., Bergmire-Sweat, D., Butler, J.C.,
Brown, E.W., Peabody, D.J., Massi, D.S.,
Carpenter, J.C., Pruckler, J.M., Benson, R.F.,
and Fields, B.S. (1999) Hospital characteristics associated with colonization of water
systems by Legionella and risk of nosocomial
legionnaires’disease: a cohort study of 15
hospitals. Infection Control and Hospital
Epidemiologyy 20, 798–805.
121. Rangel-Frausto, M.S., Rhomberg, P., Hollis,
R.J., Pfaller, M.A., Wenzel, R.P., Helms,
C.M., and Herwaldt, L.A. (1999) Persistence
of Legionella pneumophila in a hospital’s
water system: a 13–year survey. Infection
Control and Hospital Epidemiology 20, 793–
797.
122. Yu, V.L. and Stout, J.E. (2000) Hospital characteristics associated with colonization of
water systems by Legionella and risk of nosocomial legionnaires’disease: a cohort study
of 15 hospitals. Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology 21, 434–435.



123. Rowbotham, T.J. (1980) Preliminary report on
the pathogenicity of Legionella pneumophila
for freshwater and soil amoebae. Journal of
Clinical Pathology 33, 1179–1183.
124. Fliermans, C.B. (1996) Ecology of Legionella:
from data to knowledge with a little Wisdom.
Microbial Ecology 32, 203–228.
125. Winiecka-Krusnell, J. and Linder, E. (1999)
Free-living amoebae protecting Legionella in
water: the tip of an iceberg? Scandinavian
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 31, 383–385.

avium subsp. silvaticum subsp. nov. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 40,
254–260.
134. Wayne, L.G. and Kubica, G.P. (1986) The
mycobacteria. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Sneath, P.H.A., Mair, N.S.,
Sharpe, M.E., and Holt, J.G., Eds., pp. 1436–
1457. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
135. Collins, C.H., Grange, J.M., and Yates, M.D.
(1984) Mycobacteria in water. Journal of
Applied Bacteriology 57, 193–211.

126. Swanson, M.S. and Hammer, B.K. (2000)
Legionella pneumophila pathogenesis: a fateful journey from amoebae to macrophages.
Annual Review of Microbiology 54, 567–613.

136. du Moulin, G.C. and Stottmeier, K.D. (1986)
Waterborne mycobacteria: an increasing threat
to health. American Society of Microbiology
News 52, 525–529.

127. Steinert, M., Emödy, L., Amann, R., and
Hacker, J. (1997) Resuscitation of viable but
nonculturable Legionella pneumophila Philadelphia JR32 by Acanthamoeba castellanii.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 63,
2047–2053.

137. Jenkins, P.A. (1991) Mycobacteria in the
environment. Journal of Applied Bacteriology 70, 137S–141S.

128. Fritsche, T.R., Sobek, D., and Gautom, R.K.
(1998) Enhancement of in vitro cytopathogenicity by Acanthamoeba spp. following acquisition of bacterial endosymbionts. FEMS
Microbiology Letters 166, 231–236.
129. Berk, S.G., Ting, R.S., Turner, G.W., and
Ashburn, R.J. (1998) Production of respirable
vesicles containing live Legionella pneumophila
cells by two Acanthamoeba spp. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 64, 279–286.
130. O’Brien, S. and Bhopal, R.S. (1993)
Legionnaires’disease: the infective dose paradox. Lancet 342, 5.
131. Wolinsky, E. (1979) Nontuberculous mycobacteria and associated diseases. American
Review of Respiratory Disease 119, 107–159.
132. Shinnick, T. and Good, R.C. (1994) Mycobacterial taxonomy. European Journal of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases
13, 884–901.
133. Thorel, M.F., Krichevsky, M.I., and LevyFrebault, V. (1990) Numerical taxonomy of
mycobactin-dependent mycobacteria, emended
description of Mycobacterium avium, and description of Mycobacterium avium subsp. avium
subsp. nov., Mycobacterium avium subsp.
paratuberculosis subsp. nov., Mycobacterium

138. Falkinham, J.O. (1996) Epidemiology of infection by nontuberculous mycobacteria.
Clinical Microbiology Reviews 177–215.
139. Morrissey, A.B., Aisu, T.O., Falkinham, J.O.,
Eriki, P.P., Eliner, J.J., and Daniel, T.M.
(1992) Absence of Mycobacterium avium
complex disease in patients with AIDS. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 5, 477–478.
140. Grange, J.M., Yates, M.D., and Boughton, E.
(1990) Review: the avian tubercle bacillus
and its relatives. Journal of Applied Bacteriology 68,411–431.
141. Yajko, D.M., Chin, D.P., Gonzalez, P.C.,
Nassos, P.S., Hopewell, P.C., Reingold, A.L.,
Horsburgh, C.R., Yakrus, M.A., Ostroff, S.M.,
and Hadley, W.K. (1995) Mycobacterium
avium complex in water, food, and soil
samples collected from the environment of
HIV-infected individuals. Journal of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human
Retrovirology 9, 176–182.
142. du Moulin, G.C., Stottmeier, K.D., Pelletier,
P.A., Tsang, A.Y. and Hedley-Whyte, J.
(1988) Concentration of Mycobacterium
avium by hospital hot water systems. Journal
of the American Medical Association 260,
1599–1601.
143. Von Reyn, C.F., Waddell, R.D., Eaton, T.,
Arbeit, R.D., Maslow, J.N., Barber, T.W.,

401



Brindle, R.J., Gilks, C.F., Lumio, J.,
Lahdevirta, J. et al. (1993) Isolation of Mycobacterium avium complex from water in the
United States, Finland, Zaire, and Kenya.
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 31, 3227–
3230.
144. Von Reyn, C.F., Maslow, J.N., Barber,T.W.,
Falkinham, J.O., and Arbeit, R.D. (1994) Persistent colonisation of potable water as a
source of Mycobacterium avium infection in
AIDS. Lancet 343, 1137.
145. Glover, N., Holtzman, A., Aronson, T.,
Froman, S., Berlin, O.G.W., Dominguez, P.,
Kunkel, K.A., Overturf, G., Stelma, G., Jr.,
Smith, C. and Yakrus, M. (1994) The isolation and identification of Mycobacterium
avium complex (MAC) recovered from Los
Angeles potable water, a possible source of
infection in AIDS patients. International Journal of Environmental Health Research 1, 63–
72.
146. Montecalvo, M.A., Forester, G., Tsang, A.Y.,
Du Moulin, G. and Wormser, G.P. (1994)
Colonization of potable water with Mycobacterium avium complex in homes of HIV-infected patients. Lancet 343, 1639.
147. Kirschner, R.A., Parker, B.C., and Falkinham,
J.O. (1999) Humic and fulvic acids stimulate
the growth of Mycobacterium avium. FEMS
Microbiology Ecology 30, 327–332.
148. Cirillo, J.D., Falkow, S., Tompkins, L.S., and
Bermudez, L.E. (1997) Interaction of Mycobacterium avium with environmental amoebae enhances virulence. Infection and Immunity 65, 3759–3767.
149. Steinert, M., Birkness, K., White, E., Fields,
B., and Quinn, F. (1998) Mycobacterium
avium bacilli grow saprozoically in coculture
with Acanthamoeba polyphaga and survive
within cyst walls. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 64, 2256–2261.
150. Aronson, T., Holtzman, A., Glover, N., Boian,
M., Froman, S., Berlin, O.G., Hill, H., and
Stelma, G. Jr. (1999) Comparison of large
restriction fragments of Mycobacterium avium
isolates recovered from AIDS and non-AIDS
patients with those of isolates from potable
water. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 37,
1008–1012.

402

151. Bodmer, T., Miltner, E. and Bermudez, L.E.
(2000) Mycobacterium avium resists exposure to the acidic conditions stomach. FEMS
Microbiology Letters 182, 45–49.
152. Horsburgh, C.R. (1992) Epidemiology of
mycobacterial diseases in AIDS. Research in
Microbiology 143, 373–377.
153. Squier, C., Yu, V.L., and Stout, J.E. (2000)
Waterborne nosocomial infections. Current
Infectious Diseases Reports 2(6): 490–96
154. Yates, M.V., Citek, R.W., Kamper, M.F., and
Salazar, A.M. (2000) Detecting enteroviruses
in water: comparing infectivity, molecular,
and combination methods.
155. Engel, H.W.B., Berwald, L.G., and Havelaar,
A.H. (1980) The occurrence of Mycobacterium kansasii in tap water. Tubercle 61, 21–
26.
156. Kaustova, J., Olsovsky, Z., Kubin, M.,
Zatloukai, O., Pelikan, M., and Hradil, Y.
(1981) Endemic occurrence of Mycobacterium kansasii in water supply systems. Journal of Hygiene, Epidemiology, Microbiology
and Immunology 25, 24–30.
157. Herman-Taylor, J., Bull, T.J., Sheridan, J.M,
Cheng, J., Stellakis, M.L., and Sumar, N.
(2000) Causation of Crohn’s disease by Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis. Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology
14, 521–539.
158. McFadden, J.J., Collins, J., Beaman, B., Arthur,
M., and Gitnick, G. (1992) Mycobacteria in
Crohn’s disease: DNA probes identify the wood
pigeon strain of Mycobacterium avium and
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis from human
tissue. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 30,
3070–3073.
159. Ernst, P.B. and Gold, B.D. (2000) The disease spectrum of Helicobacter pylori: the
immunopathogenesis of gastroduodenal ulcer
and gastric cancer. Annual Review of Microbiology 54, 615–640.
160. Tursi, A., Cammarota, G., Papa, A., Cuoco,
L., Gentiloni, N., Fedeli, P., Fedeli, G.,
and Gasbarrini, G. (1997) The modes of
transmission of Helicobacter pylori infection. Recenti Progressi in Medicina 88,
232–236.



161. Leung, W.K., Siu, K.L., Kwok, C.K., Chan,
S.Y., Sung, R., and Sung, J.J. (1999) Isolation of Helicobacter pylori from vomitus in
children and its implication in gastro-oral
transmission. American Journal of Gastroenterology 94, 2881–2884.
162. Parsonnet, J., Shmuely, H., and Haggerty, T.
(1999) Fecal and oral shedding of Helicobacter
pylori from healthy infected adults. JAMA 282,
2240–2245.
163. Deltenre, M. and de Koster, E. (2000) How
come I’ve got it? (A review of Helicobacter
pylori transmission). European Journal of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 12, 479–
482.
164. Vincent, P. (1995) Transmission and acquisition of Helicobacter pylori infection: evidences and hypothesis. Biomédecine et
Pharmacothérapie 49, 11–18.
165. Sasaki, K., Tajiri, Y., Sata, M., Fujii, Y.,
Matsubara, F., Zhao, M., Shimizu, S.,
Toyonaga, A., and Tanikawa, K. (1999)
Helicobacter pylori in the natural environment. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious
Diseases 31, 275–279.
166. Hulten, K., Han, S.W., Enroth, H., Klein,
P.D., Opekun, A.R., Gilman, R.H., Evans,
D.G., Engstrand, L., Graham, D.Y., and ElZaatari, F.A. (1996) Helicobacter pylori in
the drinking water in Peru. Gastroenterology
110, 1031–1035.
167. Hulten, K., Enroth, H., Nyström, T., and
Engstrand, L. (1998) Presence of Helicobacter
species DNA in Swedish water. Journal of
Applied Microbiology 85, 282–286.
168. McKeown, I., Orr, P., Macdonald, S., Kabani,
A., Brown, R., Coghlan, G., Dawood, M.,
Embil, J., Sargent, M., Smart, G., and
Bernstein, C.N. (1999) Helicobacter pylori in
the Canadian arctic: seroprevalence and detection in community water samples. American Journal of Gastroenterology 94, 1823–
1829.
169. Johnson, C.H., Rice, E.W., and Reasoner, D.J.
(1997) Inactivation of Helicobacter pylori by
chlorination. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 63, 4969–4970.

170. Hegarty ,J.P., Dowd, M.T., and Baker, K.H.
(1999) Occurrence of Helicobacter pylori in
surface water in the United States. Journal of
Applied Microbiology 87, 697–701.
171. Mizoguchi, H., Fujioka, T., and Nasu, N.
(1999) Evidence for viability of coccoid forms
of Helicobacter pylori. Journal of Gastroenterology 34, 32–36.
172. Jiang, X. and Doyle, M.P. (1998) Effect of
environmental and substrate factors on survival and growth of Helicobacter pylori. Journal of Food Protection 61, 929–933.
173. Parsonnet, J., Blaser, M.J., Perez-Perez, G.I.,
Hargrett-Bean, N., and Tauxe, R.V. (1992)
Symptoms and risk factors of Helicobacter
pylori infection in a cohort of epidemiologists. Gastroenterology 102, 41–46.
174. Begue, R.E., Gonzales, J.L., Correa-Gracian,
H., and Tang, S.C. (1998) Dietary risk factors
associated with the transmission of Helicobacter
pylori in Lima, Peru. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 59, 637–640.
175. Watanabe, T., Tomita, S., Kudo, M.,
Kurokawa, M., Orino, A., Todo, A., and
Chiba, T. (1998) Detection of Helicobacter
pylori gene by means of immunomagnetic
separation-based polymerase chain reaction
in feces. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 33, 1140–1143.
176. Makristathis, A., Pasching, E., Schutze, K.,
Wimmer, M., Rotter, M.L. and Hirschl, A.M.
(1998) Detection of Helicobacter pylori in
stool specimens by PCR and antigen enzyme
immunoassay. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 36, 2772–2774.
177. Russo, F., Notarnicola, M., Di Matteo, G.,
Leoci, C., Caruso, M.L., Pirrelli, M.,
Caradonna, M., Morandi, L., and Di Leo, A.
(1999) Detection of Helicobacter pylori cagA
gene by polymerase chain reaction in faecal
samples. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 11, 251–256.
178. Gramley, W.A., Asghar, A., Frierson, H.R.,
Jr., and Powell, S.M. (1999) Detection of
Helicobacter pylori DNA in fecal samples
from infected individuals. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 37, 2236–2240.

403



179. Vaira, D., Malfertheiner, P., Megraud, F.,
Axon, A.T., Deltenre, M., Hirschl, A.M.,
Gasbarrini, G., O’Morain, C., Garcia, J.M.,
Quina, M. and Tytgat, G.N. (1999) Diagnosis
of Helicobacter pylori infection with a new
non-invasive antigen-based assay. HpSA European study group. Lancet 354, 30–33.
180. Cellini, L., Dainelli, B., Angelucci, D., Grossi,
L., Di Bartolomeo, S., Di Campli, E., and Marzio,
L. (1999) Evidence for an oral-faecal transmission of Helicobacter pylori infection in an experimental murine model. APMIS 107, 477–484.
181. Casemore, D.P. (1990) Epidemiological aspects of human cryptosporidiosis. Epidemiology and Infection 104, 1–28.
182. Current, W.L. and Garcia, L.S. (1991)
Cryptosporidiosis. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 4, 325–358.
183. Meinhardt, P.L., Casemore, D.P. and Miller,
K.B. (1996) Epidemiologic aspects of human
cryptosporidiosis and the role of waterborne
transmission. Epidemiology Reviews 18,118.
184. Marshall, M.M., Naumovitz, D., Ortega, Y.,
and Sterling, C.R. (1997) Waterborne protozoan pathogens. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 10, 67–85.
185. Perz, J.F., Ennever, F.K., and Le Blancq, S.M.
(1998) Cryptosporidium in tap water. American Journal of Epidemiology 147, 289.
186. Curry, A. and Smith, H.V. (1998) Emerging pathogens: Isospora, Cyclospora and microsporidia.
Parasitology 117S, 143–159.
187. Sterling, C.R. and Ortega, Y.R. (1999)
Cyclospora: an enigma worth unraveling.
Emerging Infectious Diseases 5, 48–53.
188. Mota, P., Rauch, C.A., and Edberg, S.C. (2000)
Microsporidia and Cyclospora: epidemiology
and assessment of risk from the environment.
Critical Reviews in Microbiology 26, 69–90.
189. Herwaldt, B.L. (2000) Cyclospora cayetanensis:
a review, focusing on the outbreaks of
cyclosporiasis in the 1990s. Clinical Infectious
Diseases 31, 1040–1057.
190. D’Antonio, R.G., Winn, R.E., Taylor, J.P., et al.
(1985) A waterborne outbreak of cryptosporidiosis
in normal hosts. Annals of Internal Medicine
103, 886–888.

404

191. Mac Kenzie, W.R., Hoxie, N.J., Proctor, M.E.,
Gradus, M.S., Blair, K.A., Peterson, D.E. et
al. (1994) A massive outbreak in Milwaukee
of Cryptosporidium infection transmitted
through the public water supply. New England Journal of Medicine 331, 161–167.
192. Haas, C.N. and Rose, J.B. (1994) Reconciliation of microbial risk models and outbreak epidemiology: the case of the Milwaukee outbreak. In Proceedings of the
American Water Works Association. pp.
517–523. Denver: American Water Works
Association.
193. Goldstein, S.T., Juranek, D.D., Ravanholt, O.,
Hightower, A.W., Martin, D.G., Mesnik, J.L.,
Griffiths, S.D., Bryant, A.J., Reich, R.R., and
Herwald, B.L. (1996) Cryptosporidiosis: an
outbreak associated with drinking water despite state-of-the-art water treatment. Annals
of Internal Medicine 124, 459.
194. Rose, J.B. (1990) Occurrence and control
of Cryptosporidium in drinking water. In:
Drinking Water Microbiology. Progress
and Recent Developments. McFeters, G.A.,
Ed., pp. 294–322. New York: Springer
Verlag.
195. Rose, J.B. (1993) Enteric waterborne protozoa: hazard and exposure assessment. In Safety
of water disinfection: balancing chemical and
microbial risks. Craun, G.F., Ed., pp. 115–
126. Washington D.C.: ILSI Press.
196. Payment, P., Berte, A., Prevost, M., Menard,
B., and Barbeau, B. (2000) Occurrence of
pathogenic microorganisms in the Saint
Lawrence river (Canada) and comparison of
health risks for populations using it as their
source of drinking water. Canadian Journal
of Microbiology 46, 565–576.
197. Casemore, D.P. (1995) Disinfection options.
In Proceedings of Workshop on Treatment
Optimisation for Cryptosporidium Removal
from Water Supplies. West, P.A. and Smith,
M.S., Eds., pp 19–24. London: HMSO.
198. Chauret, C., Nolan, K., Chen, P., Springthorpe,
S., and Sattar, S. (1998) Aging of Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts in river water and
their susceptibility to disinfection by chlorine
and monochloramine. Canadian Journal of
Microbiology 44, 1154–1160.



199. Gale, P. (1996) Developments in microbiological risk assessment models for drinking
water—a short review. Journal of Applied
Bacteriology 81, 403–410.
200. Mossel, D.A.A, Weenk, G.H., Morris, G.P.,
and Struijk, C.B. (1998) Identification, assessment and management of food-related
microbiological hazards: historical, fundamental and psycho-social essentials. International
Journal of Food Microbiology 40, 211–243.
201. Lisle, J.T. and Rose, J.B. (1995) Cryptosporidium
contamination of water in the USA and UK: a
mini-review. Journal of Water Supply: Research
and Technology-Aqua 44, 103–117.
202. DuPont, H.L., Chappell, C.L., Sterling, C.R.,
Okhuysen, P.C., Rose, J.B., and Jakubowski,
W. (1995). Infectivity of Cryptosporidium
parvum for adult humans. New England Journal of Medicine 332, 855–859.
203. Chappell, C.L., Okhuysen, P.C., Sterling C.R.,
and DuPont, H.L. (1996) Cryptosporidium
parvum: intensity of infection and oocysts
excretion patterns in healthy volunteers. Journal of Infectious Diseases 173, 232–236.
204. Kwa, B.H., Moyad, M., Pentella, M.A., and
Rose, J.B. (1993) A nude mouse model as an
in vivo infectivity assay for cryptosporidiosis.
Water Sciences & Technology 27, 65–68.
205. Gibson, C.J. 3rd., Haas, C.N., and Rose, J.B.
(1998) Risk assessment of waterborne protozoa: current status and future trends. Parasitology. 117, S205–212.
206. Haas, C.N. (2000) Epidemiology, microbiology, and risk assessment of waterborne pathogens including Cryptosporidium. Journal of
Food Protection 63, 827–831.
207. Peng, M.M., Xiao, L., Freeman, A.R.,
Arrowood, M.J., Escalante, A.A., Weltman,
A.C., Ong, C.S., Mac Kenzie, W.R., Lal, A.A.,
and Beard, C.B. (1997) Genetic polymorphism
among Cryptosporidium parvum isolates:
evidence of two distinct human transmission
cycles. Emerging Infectious Diseases 3, 567–
573.
208. Awad-El-Kariem, F.M., Robinson, H.A.,
Petry, F., McDonald, V., Evans, D. and
Casemore, D. (1998) Differentiation between
human and animal isolates of Cryptosporidium

parvum using molecular and biological markers. Parasitology Research 84, 297–301.
209. Widmer, G., Tchack, L., Chappell, C.L., and S.
Tzipori. (1998) Sequence polymorphism in the
beta-tubulin gene reveals heterogeneous and variable population structures in Cryptosporidium
parvum. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 64, 4477–4481.
210. Spano, F., Putignani, L., Guida, S., and Crisanti,
A. (1998) Cryptosporidium parvum: PCR-RFLP
analysis of the TRAP-C1 (thrombospondin-related adhesive protein of Cryptosporidium-1)
gene discriminates between two alleles differentially associated with parasite isolates of animal and human origin. Experimental Parasitology 90, 195–198.
211. Caccio, S., Homan, W., van Dijk, K., and
Pozio. E. (1999) Genetic polymorphism at
the beta-tubulin locus among human and animal isolates of Cryptosporidium parvum.
FEMS Microbiology Letters 170, 173–179.
212. Guyot, K. (2001) 7th- International Workshops on Opportunistic Protists, Cincinnati,
June 13–16.
213. Guyot, K., Gireaudot-Liepmann, M.F. Cabon,
A., Riveau-Ricard, I., Lange, M., Delattre,
J.M. and Dei-Cas. E. (2000) Influence of US
EPA 1622 method successive steps on the
viability of Cryptosporidium oocysts. Water
Science and Technology 41, 189–196.
214. Sobottka, I., Schwartz, D.A., Schottelius, J.,
Visvesvara, G.S., Pieniazed, N.J., Schmetz,
C., Kock, N.P., Laufs, R., and Albrecht, H.
(1998) Prevalence and clinical significance
of intestinal microsporidiosis in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients with
and without diarrhea in Germany: a prospective coprodiagnostic study. Clinical Infectious
Diseases 26, 475–480.
215. Leder, K., Ryan, N., Spelman, D., and Crowe,
S.M. (1998) Microsporidial disease in HIVinfected patients: a report of 42 patients and
review of the literature. Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases 30, 331–338.
216. Rabold, J.G., Hoge, C.W., Shlim, D.R.,
Kefford, C., Rajah, R., and Echeverria, P.
(1994) Cyclospora outbreak associated with
chlorinated drinking water. Lancet 344, 1360–
1361.

405



217. Huang, P., Weber, J.T., Sosin, D.M., Griffin,
P.M., Long, E.G., Murphy, J.J., Kocka, F.,
Peters, C., and Kallick, C. (1995) The first
reported outbreak of diarrheal illness associated with Cyclospora in the United States.
Annals of Internal Medicine 123, 409–414.
218. Koumans, E.H.A., Katz, D.J., Malecki, J.M.,
Kumar, S., Wahlquist, S.P., Arrowood, M.J.,
et al. (1998) An outbreak of cyclosporiasis in
Florida 1995: a harbinger of multistate outbreaks in 1996 and 1997. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 59, 235–
242.
219. Herwaldt, B., Ackers, M.L., and the Cyclospora
working group. (1997) An outbreak in 1996 of
cyclosporiasis associated with imported raspberries. New England Journal of Medicine 336,
1548–1556.
220. Dumoulin, A., Guyot, K., Lelievre, E., Dei-Cas,
E., and Cailliez. J.C. (2000) Cryptosporidium et
faune sauvage: un risque pour l’homme? Parasite. 7, 167–172.
221. Lindsay, D.S., Dubey, J.P., and Blagburn,
B.L. (1997) Biology of Isospora spp. from
humans, nonhuman primates, and domestic
animals. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 10,
19–34.
222. Weber, R. Bryan, R.T., Schwartz, D.A., and
Owen, R.L. (1994) Human microsporidial
infections. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 7,
426–461.
223. Gumbo, T., Sarbah, S., Gangaidzo, I.T.,
Ortega, Y., Sterling, C.R., Carbille, A.,
Tzipori, S., and Wiest ,P.M. (1999) Intestinal
parasites in patients with diarrhea and human
immunodeficiency virus infection in Zimbabwe. AIDS 13, 819–821.
224. Lopez-Velez, R., Turrientes, M.C., Garron,
C., Montilla, P., Navajas, R., Fenoy, S., and
del Aguila, C. (1999) Microsporidiosis in travelers with diarrhea from the tropics. Journal
of Travel Medicine 6, 223–227.
225. Sparfel, J.M., Sarfati, C., Liguory, O., Caroff,
B., Dumoutier, N., Gueglio, B., Billaud, E.,
Raffi, F., Molina, J.M., Miegeville, M., et al.
(1997) Detection of microsporidia and identification of Enterocytozoon bienensi in surface
water by filtration followed by specific PCR.
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology 44, 78S.

406

226. Wolk, D.M., Johnson, C.H., Rice, E.W.,
Marshall, M.M., Grahn, K.F., Plummer, C.B.,
and Sterlin, C.R. (2000) A spore counting
method and cell culture model for chlorine
disinfection studies of Encephalitozoon syn.
Septata intestinalis. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66, 1266–1273.
227. Fournier, S., Liguory, O., Santillana-Hayat,
M., Guillot, E., Sarfati, C., Dumoutier, N.,
Molina, J., and Derouin, F. (2000) Detection
of microsporidia in surface water: a one-year
follow-up study. FEMS Immunology and
Medical Microbiology 29, 95–100.
228. Metcalf, T.G., Melnick, J.L., and Estes, M.K.
(1995) Environmental virology: from detection of virus in sewage and water by isolation
to identification by molecular biology - A trip
of over 50 years. Annual Review of Microbiology 49, 461–487.
229. Lodder, W.J., Vinje, J., Van de Heide, R.,
Roda Husman, A.M., Leenen, E.J.T., and
Koopmans, M.P.G. (1999) Molecular detection of Norwalk-like caliciviruses in sewage.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65,
5624–5627.
230. Koopmans, M.P.G., Goosen, E.S., Lima, A.,
McAuliffe, I.T., Nataro, J.P., Barrett, L.J.,
Glass, R.I., and Guerrant, R.L. 1997. Association of torovirus with acute and persistent
diarrhea in children. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 16, 504–507.
231. Grabow, W.O.K, Taylor, M.B., Clay, C.G.,
and De Villiers, J.C. (1999) Molecular detection of viruses in drinking water implications
for safety and disinfection. In: The Safety of
Water Disinfection: Balancing Chemical and
Microbial Risks. Miami Beach: ILSI Press.
232. Van der Poel, W.H.M, Vinje, J., Van der
Heide, R., Herrera, M.I., Vivo, A., and
Koopmans, M.P.G. (2000) Norwalk-like
calicivirus genes in farm animals. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 6, 36.
233. Glass, R.I. (1995) Other viral agents of gastroenteritis. In Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract. Blaser, M.J., Smith, P.D., Ravdin,
J.I., Greenberg, H.B. and Guerrant, R.L., Eds.,
pp. 1055–1064. New York: Raven Press Ltd.
234. Mosley, J.W. (1967) Transmission of viral
diseases by drinking water. In: Transmission



of Viruses by the Water Route. Berg, G., Ed.,
pp. 5. New York: Interscience.
235. Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(1994) Surveillance for waterborne disease
outbreaks - United States, 1991–1992. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 42, 1–22.
236. Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(1996) Surveillance for waterborne disease
outbreaks-United States, 1993–1994. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 45, 1–33.
237. Naik, S.R., Aggarwal, R., Salunke, P.N., and
Mehrotra, N.N. (1992) A large waterborne viral
hepatitis E epidemic in Kanpur, India. Bulletin
of the World Health Organization 70, 597–604.
238. Vishwanathan, R. (1957) Infectious hepatitis in
Delhi (1955–56): a critical study; epidemiology.
Indian Journal of Medical Research 45, 1–30.
239. Bradley, D.W. (1992) Hepatitis E: epidemiology, aetiology and molecular biology. Review of Medical Virology 2, 19–28.
240. Aggarwal, R. and Krawczynski, K. (2000)
Hepatitis E: an overview and recent advances
in clinical and laboratory research. Journal of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 15, 9–20.

246. Wright, P.J., Gunesekere, I.C., Doultree, J.C.,
and Marshall, J.A. (1998) Small round-structured (Norwalk-like) viruses and classical
human caliciviruses in southeastern Australia, 1980–1996. Journal of Medical Virology
55, 312–320.
247. Parks, C.G., Moe, C.L., Rhodes, D., Lima,
A., Barrett, L., Tseng, F., Baric, R., Talal, A.,
and Guerrant, R. (1999) Genomic diversity of
“Norwalk like viruses” (NLVs): pediatric infections in a Brazilian shantytown. Journal of
Medical Virology. 58, 426–434.
248. Vinje, J., Deijl, H., van der Heide, R., Lewis,
D., Hedlund, K.O., Svensson, L., and
Koopmans, M.P. (2000) Molecular detection
and epidemiology of sapporo-like viruses.
Journal of Clinical Microbiology 38, 530–
536.
249. Koopmans, M.P.G., Bijen, M.H., Monroe,
S.S., and Vinje, J. (1998) Age-stratified
seroprevalence of neutralizing antibodies to
astrovirus types 1 to 7 in humans in the Netherlands. Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratory
Immunology 5, 33–37.

242. Pringle, C.R. (1998) Virus taxonomy-San Diego 1998. Archives of Virology 143, 1449–459.

250. Matsui, M., Ushijima, H., Hachiya, M., Kakizawa,
J., Wen, L., Oseto, M., Morooka, K., and Kurtz,
J.B. (1998) Determination of serotypes of
astroviruses by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and homologies of the types by the
sequencing of Japanese isolates. Microbiology
and Immunology 42, 539–547.

243. Jiang, X., Matson, D.O., Cubitt, W.D., and
Estes, M.K. (1996) Genetic and antigenic
diversity of human caliciviruses (HuCVs)
using RT-PCR and new EIAs. Archives of
Virology Supplementum 12, 251–262.

251. Belliot, G., Laveran, H., and Monroe, S.S.
(1997) Detection and genetic differentiation
of human astroviruses: phylogenetic grouping varies by coding region. Archives of Virology 142,1323–1334.

244. Jiang, X., Cubitt, W.D., Berke, T., Zhong,
W., Dai, X., Nakata, S., Pickering, L.K., and
Matson, D.O. (1997) Sapporo-like human
caliciviruses are genetically and antigenically
diverse. Archives of Virology 142, 1813–1827.

252. Herrmann, J.E. and Blacklow, N.R. (1995)
Enteric adenoviruses. In: Infections of the
Gastrointestinal Tract. Blaser, M.J., Smith,
P.D., Ravdin, J.I., Greenberg, H.B. and
Guerrant, R.L., Ed., pp. 1047–1053. New
York: Raven Press Ltd.

241. Winn, W.C. (1999) Enterically transmitted
hepatitis. Hepatitis A and E viruses. Clinics
in Laboratory Medicine 19, 661–673.

245. Noel, J.S., Liu, B.L., Humphrey, C.D.,
Rodriguez, E.M., Lambden, P.R., Clarke, I.N.,
Dwyer, D.M., Ando, T., Glass, R.I., and Monroe, S.S. (1997) Parkville virus: a novel genetic variant of human calicivirus in the
Sapporo virus clade, associated with an outbreak of gastroenteritis in adults. Journal of
Medical Virology 52, 173–178.

253. Kapikian, A.Z., Estes, M.K. and Chanock,
R.M. (1996) Norwalk group of viruses. In:
Fields Virology, 3rd edition. Fields, B.N.,
Knipe, D.M., Howley, P.M., Chanock, R.M.,
Melnick, J.L., Monath, T.P., Roizman, B.,
and Straus, S.E., Ed., Philadelphia, Pa:
Lippincott-Raven.

407



254. Kukkula, M., Maunula, L., Silvennoinen, E.,
and von Bonsdorff, C.H. (1999) Outbreak of
viral gastroenteritis due to drinking water
contaminated by Norwalk-like viruses. Journal of Infectious Diseases 180, 1771–1776.
255. Hardy, M.E. (1999) Norwalk and “Norwalklike viruses” in epidemic gastroenteritis. Clinics in Laboratory Medicine 19, 675–690.
256. Glass, R.I., Noel, J., Ando, T., Fankhauser,
R., Belliot, G., Mounts, A., Parashar, U.D.,
Brese, J.S., and Monroe, S.S. (2000) The epidemiology of enteric caliciviruses from humans: a reassessment using new diagnostics.
Journal of Infectious Diseases 181, S254–
261.
257. Payment, P. (1991) Antibody levels to selected enteric viruses in a French-Canadian
population in the province of Quebec
(Canada). Immunology and Infectious Diseases 1, 317–322.
258. Abbaszadegan, M., Stewart, P., and LeChevallier,
M. (1999) A strategy for detection of viruses in
groundwater by PCR. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65, 444–449.
259. Mortensen, M.L., Ray, C.G., Payne, C.M.,
Friedman, A.D., Minnich, L.L., and Rousseau,
C. (1985) Coronavirus-like particles in human gastrointestinal disease: epidemiologic,
clinical and laboratory observations. American Journal of Diseases of Children 139, 928–
934.
260. Chany, C., Moscovici, O., Lebon, P., and
Rousset, S. (1982) Association of Coronavirus
infection with neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis. Pediatrics, 69, 209–214.
261. Gonzalez, P., Sanches, A., Rivera, P., Jimenez,
C., and Hernandez, F. (1997) Rotavirus and
coronavirus outbreak: etiology of annual diarrhea in Costa Rican children. Revista de
Biologia Tropical 45, 989–991.
262. Giordano, M.O., Martinez, L.C., Rinaldi, D.,
Espu,l C., Martinez, N., Isa, M.B., Depetris,
A.R., Medeot, S.I., and Nates, S.V. (1999
Diarrhea and enteric emerging viruses in HIV
-infected patients. AIDS Research and Human Retrovirus 15, 1427–1432.
263. Payment, P. and Armon, R. (1989) Virus removal by drinking water treatment processes.

408

CRC Critical Reviews in Environmental Control 19, 15–31.
264. Graham, D.Y., Dufour, G.R., and Estes, M.K.
(1987) Minimal infective dose of rotavirus.
Archives of Virology 92, 261–271.
265. Ward, R.L., Bernstein, D.I., Ylung, E.C.,
Sherwood, J.R., Knowlton, D.R., and Schiff,
G.M. (1986) Human rotavirus studies in volunteers: determination of infectious dose and
serological response to infection. Journal of
Infectious Diseases 154, 871–880.
266. Cubitt, W.D. (1989) Diagnosis, occurrence
and clinical significance of the human “candidate” caliciviruses. Progress in Medical
Virology 36, 103–119.
267. Kapikian, A.Z. and Chanock, R.M. (1990)
Norwalk group of viruses. In: Virology. 2nd
ed. Fields, B.N., Knipe, D.M., Chanock, R.M.
et al., Eds., pp. 61–93 New York: Raven
Press.
268. Kurtz, B., Lee, T.W. (1987) Astroviruses:
human animal. In: Novel Diarrhoea Viruses.
Bock, G. and Whelan., J., Eds., Foundation
Symp. 128 pp. 92–107. Chichester UK: John
Wiley.
269. Payment, P. (1993) Viruses: prevalence of
disease, levels and sources. In: Safety of Water
Disinfection: Balancing Chemical and Microbial Risks. Craun, G.F., Ed., pp. 99–115.
Washington D.C.: ILSI Press.
270. Payment, P. and Morin, E. (1989) Minimal
infective dose of the OSU strain of porcine
rotavirus. Archives of Virology 112, 277–282.
271. Goyal, S.M. (1983) Indicators of viruses. In
Viral pollution of the environment. ed.Berg,
G. pp. 211–227. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
272. Gerba, C.P. and Rose, J.B. (1990) Viruses in
source and drinking water. In: Drinking Water Microbiology. McFeters, G.A., Ed., pp.
380–96. New York: Springer-Verlag.
273. Schwartzbrod, L. (1991) Virologie des milieux hydriques. Paris: Tec. & Doc - Lavoisier.
274. Payment, P., Franco, E., Richardson, L., and
Siemiatychi, J. (1991) Gastrointestinal health
effects associated with the consumption of
drinking water produced by point-of-use domestic reverse-osmosis filtration units. Ap-



plied and Environmental Microbiology 57,
945–948.
275. Payment, P., Richardson, L., Siemiatycki, J.,
Dewar, R., Edwardes, M., and Franco, E.
(1991b) A randomized trial to evaluate the
risk of gastrointestinal disease due to consumption of drinking water meeting current
microbiological standards. American Journal
of Public Health 81, 703.
276. Payment, P., Coffin, E., and Paquette, G..
(1994) Blood agar to detect virulence factors
in tap water heterotrophic bacteria. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 60, 1179–
1183.
277. Edberg, S.C., Kops, S., Kontnick, C., and
Escarzaga, M. (1997) Analysis of cytotoxicity and invasiveness of heterotrophic plate
count bacteria (HPC) isolated from drinking
water on blood media. Journal of Applied
Microbiology 82, 455–461.
278. Zmirou, D., Reys, S., Courtois, X. et al. (1995)
Residual microbiological risk after simple

chlorine treatment of drinking groundwater
in small community systems. European Journal of Public Health 5, 75–81.
279. Birkhead, G. and Vogt, R.L. (1989) Epidemiologic surveillance for endemic Giardia
lamblia infection in Vermont. The roles of
waterborne and person-to-person transmission. American Journal of Epidemiology 129,
762–768.
280. Fraser, G.G. and Cooke, K.R. (1991) Endemic giardiasis and municipal water supply.
American Journal of Public Health 81, 760.
281. Dennis, D.T., Smith, R.P., Welch, J.J., Chute,
C.G., Anderson, B., Herndon, J.L. and
Fordham von Reyn, F. (1993) Endemic giardiasis in New Hampshire: a case-control study
of environmental risks. Journal of Infectious
Diseases 167, 1391–1395.
282. Roefer, P.A., Monscvitz, J.T., and Rexing,
D.J. (1996) The Las Vegas cryptosporidiosis
outbreak. Journal of the American Water
Works Association 88, 95–106.

409



