toxins
Review

Co-Occurrence of Cyanobacteria and Cyanotoxins
with Other Environmental Health Hazards:
Impacts and Implications
James S. Metcalf 1, * and Geoffrey A. Codd 2,3
1
2
3

*

Brain Chemistry Labs, Jackson, WY 83001, USA
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK; g.a.codd@stir.ac.uk
Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, UK
Correspondence: james@ethnomedicine.org; Tel.: +1-307-734-1680

Received: 11 August 2020; Accepted: 15 September 2020; Published: 1 October 2020




Abstract: Toxin-producing cyanobacteria in aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial environments can occur
alongside a wide range of additional health hazards including biological agents and synthetic
materials. Cases of intoxications involving cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins, with exposure to additional
hazards, are discussed. Examples of the co-occurrence of cyanobacteria in such combinations are
reviewed, including cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins plus algal toxins, microbial pathogens and
fecal indicator bacteria, metals, pesticides, and microplastics. Toxicity assessments of cyanobacteria,
cyanotoxins, and these additional agents, where investigated in bioassays and in defined combinations,
are discussed and further research needs are identified.
Keywords: cyanobacteria; co-occurrence; toxicity; plastics; metals; biocide
Key Contribution: This review article examines the potential for co-occurrence of cyanobacterial
toxins with other toxic compounds, bacteria, and chemicals. An understanding of such risks is
essential to accurately assess the threat of these combinations to human health.

1. Introduction
Research on the production, properties, monitoring, and analysis of toxigenic cyanobacteria,
and of particular cyanotoxins, has increased greatly over the past 40 years [1–5]. Aspects of the
environmental occurrence, biosynthesis, properties, and health significance of the most widely
investigated individual classes of cyanotoxins, principally the microcystins, nodularins, saxitoxins,
cylindrospermopsins, and anatoxins have been reviewed [6–12]. On the toxicity assessment of
cyanobacterial cultures and environmental samples containing cyanobacteria, and the involvement
of specific cyanotoxins, the research has passed through several discernible phases. The earliest
known experimental investigations into the suspected toxicity of cyanobacteria, which followed
animal poisonings, were performed by George Francis [13,14]. These involved the oral dosing of
healthy animals, of the same species which had succumbed to intoxication, with the suspected toxic
material, in this case Nodularia scum, and the consequent replication in the dosed animals of mortalities
and gross signs of organ damage. Bioassays, a quantitative development of this logical approach,
but initially without the chemical identification and quantification of the toxic substances in the test
material, were then increasingly used to test for toxic principles for several decades [1–3]. These were
gradually complemented, and then overtaken by the emerging methods for the identification and
quantification of specific cyanotoxins in the test material and the quantitative characterization of
toxicity using individual purified cyanotoxins originally obtained via bioassay-guided purification
of cyanobacterial material. The increasing availability of physico-chemical methods for analysis
Toxins 2020, 12, 629; doi:10.3390/toxins12100629

www.mdpi.com/journal/toxins



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

2 of 17

Toxins 2020, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

2 of 16

and anatoxin-a,
cyanotoxinand
purification,
especially for microcystins,
nodularin-R,
saxitoxins
and anatoxin-a,
and
later for cylindrospermopsins
[1–5], appears
to have led
to an increased
focus on
and
later
for
cylindrospermopsins
[1–5],
appears
to
have
led
to
an
increased
focus
on
use of these
the use of these methods, with a corresponding decline in the use of the whole animalthe
bioassays.
The
methods,
with
a corresponding
in the
of the
whole
animal bioassays.
The move
move
away
from
whole animal decline
bioassays
hasuse
been
further
influenced
by increasing
ethicalaway
and
from whole animal
bioassays
hasnon-mammalian
been further influenced
by biochemical,
increasing ethical
and humanitarian
humanitarian
concerns.
Although
in vivo and
enzyme-based,
and cellconcerns.
Although
non-mammalian
in
vivo
and
biochemical,
enzyme-based,
and
in vitro
based in vitro bioassays are available [3,15] the continuing focus on the use of cell-based
physico-chemical
bioassayshas
arealso
available
the continuing
focus onneed
the use
physico-chemical
methods
has also
methods
been [3,15]
influenced
by the increasing
for of
validated,
quantitative
procedures
to
been
influenced
by
the
increasing
need
for
validated,
quantitative
procedures
to
satisfy
statutory
satisfy statutory regulations and guidelines [16]. In addition, genetic methods [17] may also
regulationsto
and
guidelines in
[16].
In addition,
genetic methods
[17]
may also contribute
a reductionthe
in
contribute
a reduction
bioassay
use through
providing
alternative
testing to to
understand
bioassay
use
through
providing
alternative
testing
to
understand
the
potential
for
toxin
production
potential for toxin production by cyanobacteria.
by cyanobacteria.
The further development and application of physico-chemical analytical methods for the
The further
development
and applicationofofspecific
physico-chemical
analytical
methods
for the
detection,
detection,
identification,
and quantification
cyanotoxins
continues
to support
and
enable
identification,
and
quantification
of
specific
cyanotoxins
continues
to
support
and
enable
the
application
the application of policies for the risk management of water resources affected by cyanobacterial mass
of policies for These
the riskinclude
management
of water
resources
affected byclasses
cyanobacterial
mass populations.
populations.
specific
methods
for individual
of cyanotoxins
[5] and,
These
include
specific
methods
for
individual
classes
of
cyanotoxins
[5]
and,
increasingly,
methods
for
increasingly, methods for the multiclass analysis of the toxins in single procedures [18–21]. However,
the
multiclass
analysis
of
the
toxins
in
single
procedures
[18–21].
However,
whilst
such
methods
alone
whilst such methods alone can provide a partial indication of toxicity presented by axenic strains of
can provide a partial
of toxicity presented
of cyanobacteria
grown in the
cyanobacteria
grownindication
in the laboratory,
they may by
notaxenic
take strains
into full
account the toxicological
laboratory,
they
may
not
take
into
full
account
the
toxicological
significance
of
mass
populations
of
significance of mass populations of cyanobacteria in open environments.
cyanobacteria
in
open
environments.
In marine and freshwater environments and in terrestrial and aerial habitats, whilst
In marine can
and readily
freshwater
environments
and in i.e.,
terrestrial
and aerial
habitats,
whilst
cyanobacteria
cyanobacteria
appear
as “dominant”,
to account
for the
majority
of the
microbial
can
readily
appear
as
“dominant”,
i.e.,
to
account
for
the
majority
of
the
microbial
biomass,
they can
biomass, they can be accompanied by a wide range of other microbes including microalgae,
be accompanied by a wide
range
of other
microbes
including
chemoheterotrophic
bacteria,
chemoheterotrophic
bacteria,
and
protozoa
[22,23].
Wheremicroalgae,
such environments
are subjected
to
and
protozoa
[22,23].
Where
such
environments
are
subjected
to
intensive
anthropogenic
human
intensive anthropogenic human pressures (e.g., wastewater and human sewage disposal and
pressures (e.g.,
wastewater
and human
sewage disposal
and industrial
discharges),
the dominant
industrial
discharges),
the dominant
cyanobacteria
can co-occur
with additional
biological
toxins
cyanobacteria
can co-occur
additional
biological
toxins (e.g.,
[19]), [24].
chemical
pollutants
(e.g.,
[19]), chemical
pollutantswith
e.g., metals
[23], and
with pathogenic
microbes
Examples
of the
e.g.,
metals
[23],
and
with
pathogenic
microbes
[24].
Examples
of
the
co-occurrence
of
cyanotoxins,
co-occurrence of cyanotoxins, plus other chemical agents and microbial pathogens, and cases of coplus other are
chemical
agents(Figure
and microbial
pathogens,
and cases
of co-exposure
reviewed
(Figure of
1).
exposure
reviewed
1). Research
to further
understand
the are
health
significance
Research to further
understand
healthcontext
significance
of cyanotoxins
is discussed
in aco-exposures
broader context
of
cyanotoxins
is discussed
in a the
broader
of cyanotoxin
co-occurrence
and
with
cyanotoxin
co-occurrence
and
co-exposures
with
additional
biological
and
anthropogenic
toxic
agents.
additional biological and anthropogenic toxic agents.

Figure1.1. Examples
Examples of
of interactions
interactions of
Figure
of cyanobacteria
cyanobacteria with
withother
otherpotentially
potentiallytoxic
toxiccomponents
componentsofofwater.
water.

to to
toxic
compounds
involves
mixtures
of two
more
toxic
It is well
wellestablished
establishedthat
thatwhen
whenexposure
exposure
toxic
compounds
involves
mixtures
of or
two
or more
substances,
the effect
such mixtures
susceptible
individuals individuals
or populations
be unpredictable,
toxic
substances,
theofeffect
of such on
mixtures
on susceptible
or can
populations
can be
but different from
the exposures
to each
of the to
toxins
separately.
ofExamples
the three
unpredictable,
but different
from the
exposures
each ifofapplied
the toxins
if appliedExamples
separately.
possible
outcomes,
namely
additive,namely
synergistic,
and antagonistic
are increasingly
of
the three
possible
outcomes,
additive,
synergistic,effects
and [25]
antagonistic
effectsemerging,
[25] are
where bioassays
including
toxigenic
cyanobacteria,
and specifically
when purified
cyanotoxins
and
increasingly
emerging,
where
bioassays
including toxigenic
cyanobacteria,
and specifically
when
non-cyanobacterial
are performed
(Table
1). are performed (Table 1).
purified
cyanotoxinstoxic
andagents,
non-cyanobacterial
toxic
agents,



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

3 of 17

Table 1. Examples of toxicity assessment by bioassay of purified cyanotoxins in combinations and of
cyanotoxins plus additional environmental toxins/pollutants.
Toxic Agents

Test Organism/Cell Line

Outcome 1

Ref.

MC-LR plus Antx-a

Mouse, intranasal bioassay

SYN

[26]

MC-LR plus Antx-a

Selenastrum capricornutum

SYN

[27]

MC-LR plus Antx-a

Cyprinus carpio, carp cells

SYN (potential)

[28]

MC-LR plus Antx-a

Vallisneria natans, and microbial biofilm

ANTAG

[29]

MC-LR plus Microcystis LPS

Artemia salina and Daphnia sp.

ANTAG

[30]

MC-LR plus CYN

Chlorella vulgaris

SYN

[31]

MC-LR plus cyanobacterial
λ-linolenic acid

Daphnia magna

ADDIT

[32]

MC-LR plus aflatoxin B1

Human hepatic cells

ANTAG

[33]

MC-LR plus aflatoxin B1,
and plus fumonisin B1

HepG2, Caco2, MDBK cell lines

ADDIT, SYN, ANTAG

[34]

MC-LR and copper

Danio rerio

SYN

[35]

MC-LR plus copper

Vallisneria natans

SYN

[36]

MC-LR plus linear alkylbenzene sulphonate

Lactuca sativa

SYN

[37]

MC-LR plus phenanthrene

Lemna gibba

ANTAG, SYN, ADDIT

[38]

CYN plus chloropyrifos

Human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line

ANTAG

[39]

CYN plus bisphenols

HepG2 cells

SYN, ADDIT

[40]

1 SYN, synergistic; ADDIT, additive; ANTAG, antagonistic toxicological outcomes of applications of multiple toxic

agents. MC-LR, microcystin-LR, Antx-a, anatoxin-a; CYN, cylindrospermopsin. Outcomes in several systems were
influenced by relative concentrations, and in some cases by timing of applications of toxins/toxicants, see references.

Of the classes of toxins produced by cyanobacteria, with the exception of guanitoxin (formerly
anatoxin-a(S) [41]), all encompass multiple chemical structures, ranging from a few (e.g., anatoxin-a and
homoanatoxin-a) to hundreds, in the case of microcystins (>240, [42]). Similarly, analyses of blooms and
cultures of cyanobacteria have shown that multiple variants can exist in extracts of individual strains,
such as for Microcystis PCC7820 with at least 10 microcystin variants reported [43] and a Thai strain of
Cylindrospermopsis that has been shown to produce two additional variants of cylindrospermopsin [44].
Therefore, when toxicity assessment is performed, then although classes of cyanotoxins may be
identified, the differing amounts of variants, whether of e.g., microcystins or anatoxins, each with
potentially differing toxicities when determined individually (e.g., [45]), may influence the risk
assessment of such bloom material. On occasion, some strains have been reported to include multiple
classes of toxins, such as microcystins and guanitoxin, as in Anabaena 525-17 [46]. In addition to these
cyanotoxins, all cyanobacteria characteristically produce lipopolysaccharide endotoxins [47].
Fitzgeorge et al. [26] provided early evidence of the synergistic action of two purified cyanotoxins
(anatoxin-a and microcystin-LR) when administered intranasally to mice. In this case, the administration
of a sublethal dose of microcystin-LR 30 min before that of anatoxin-a lowered the LD50 of the latter
four-fold. Perhaps the most high-profile human poisoning event occurred at Caruaru, Brazil [48,49].
Extensive investigations into the deaths of 50 people at a hemodialysis clinic identified microcystins as
the most likely principal cause of the fatalities, although several symptoms were reported by those
affected. Investigations continued into the intoxications and cylindrospermopsin was also implicated,
suggesting the possibility of multiple cyanotoxin exposures [50].
Clearly, when bioassays are performed in vivo and in vitro with an individual purified cyanotoxin
or defined combinations of purified cyanotoxins, then the responses can be unequivocally ascribed to
the toxin(s) administered. However, since cyanobacterial cells, whether in axenic monocyanobacterial



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

4 of 17

culture or in environmental samples, can produce a range of cyanotoxins and other bioactive secondary
products, then bioassays with crude extracts from such sources unavoidably involve exposures to
mixtures of toxic agents. These may be exclusively of cyanobacterial origin when derived from
monocyanobacterial axenic cultures, or from cyanobacterial plus a wide range of toxins/toxicants from
additional biological and anthropogenic sources in the case of environmental samples.
2. Environmental Intoxications Involving Toxigenic Cyanobacteria and Additional Agents
Some indications are available of contributory exposure to environmental health hazards in
addition to toxigenic cyanobacteria or specific cyanotoxins in wildlife poisoning episodes. Thus, whilst
a major role for microcystins and anatoxin-a in the mass mortalities of Lesser Flamingos (Phoeniconaias
minor) at Kenyan lakes was identified, additional contributions due to heavy metals, pesticides,
and mycobacterial infection were likely to have occurred [51,52]. A major role of microcystins was
similarly deduced from cyanotoxin analyses and pathology in the deaths of Mute Swans (Cygnus olor) in
the UK, although the additional contribution of lead was inferred from the abundance of fishermen’s lead
sinker-pellets in the birds’ stomachs [53]. Microcystin-, saxitoxin-, and cylindrospermopsin-producing
cyanobacterial blooms were indicated to have been early contributors to an extended major fish-kill in
the Lower St. John’s River, Florida. Later factors arising from cyanobacterial decomposition and lysis
included lower dissolved oxygen concentrations, elevated ammonia concentrations, and hemolytic
contribution from the dinoflagellate alga Heterosigma akashiwo [54].
Cases of human illness associated with exposure to toxigenic cyanobacteria also indicate the
possible contribution of additional factors. In 1979, a severe hepato-enteritis outbreak occurred among
consumers (mainly children) of drinking water from a Palm Island reservoir in Queensland, Australia,
containing a bloom of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii [55]. The subsequent isolation and characterization
of cylindrospermopsin from C. raciborskii from the reservoir provided strong evidence for a contributing
role of the cyanotoxin in the Palm Island illnesses. However, as pointed out by Hawkins et al. the
evidence suggested that the cylindrospermopsin-producing bloom should be considered as only one
possible cause [55]. It is unknown whether the copper concentration in the water, arising from the
prior treatment to kill the C. raciborskii bloom, also contributed to the illness. An episode requiring
hospitalization of army cadets undergoing swimming and canoeing exercises at Rudyard Lake, northern
England, occurred after the cadets ingested microcystin-containing Microcystis aeruginosa scum [56].
Atypical pneumonia, liver damage, and blistering around the mouth were attributed to microcystin
ingestion. However, whilst no evidence for enterovirus contamination of the water was apparent,
Escherichia coli counts indicated that the water was unsuitable for bathing [56].
3. Additional Health Hazards: Their Co-Occurrence and Interactions with Cyanobacteria
and Cyanotoxins
A wide range of microbial and chemical health hazards exists with which cyanobacteria can
be associated. The associations range from the use of purified materials in experimental laboratory
designs to investigate combined toxicological responses in vitro and in vivo, to the co-occurrence of
multiple hazards in open environments.
3.1. Fungal and Algal Toxins
The health significance of human exposure to the fungal toxin aflatoxin B1 (via the diet),
plus to microcystin via drinking water, was recognized almost 30 years ago in China [57–59].
A high incidence of primary liver cancer among local populations using surface drinking water
containing microcystin-producing cyanobacteria was associated with additional chronic exposure to
the hepatocellular carcinoma risk factor aflatoxin B1 via food consumption, including moldy maize.
Further risk factors were presented by Hepatitis B virus and alcohol [60]. Whilst not characterized as
a primary carcinogen itself, the tumor-promoting action of the microcystin(s) was expressed by the
chronic exposure of the population to the cyanotoxin, and to the primary carcinogenicity of aflatoxin



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

5 of 17

B1 and/or the Hepatitis B virus. These milestone discoveries in the history of cyanotoxins research
and risk management [6,8,9,57–59], not only illustrate the importance of exposure to cyanotoxins plus
additional health hazards, but also provide an example of the hazards of such combined exposure
via multiple exposure media: in this case, the media being water and food. Whether the timing of
the exposure to microcystin-containing cyanobacterial blooms and to aflatoxin-B1, i.e., as co-exposure
or sequential exposure, influenced the outcome among the human population, remains less certain.
Trials using human hepatic cells in vitro and rats have indicated that whilst the tumor promoting
actions of microcystin were confirmed, antagonistic action can occur when the cyanotoxin at low dose
is co-applied together with the fungal toxin [33].
The co-occurrence of cyanotoxins with microalgal phycotoxins has received little attention.
Blooms and shoreline scums of several species of toxigenic marine microalgae have long been recognized
for their roles in the mass mortalities of fish, seabirds, and sea mammals and in human intoxications,
from mild to fatal, via shellfish consumption [2]. For reviews concerning marine microalgal phycotoxins,
including the saxitoxins, palytoxins, ciguatoxins, brevetoxins, domoic acid, okadaic acid, pinnatoxins,
yessotoxins, and azaspiracids, see [61–63]. No evidence for the production of most classes of cyanotoxins
by microalgae is available, namely of microcystins, nodularins, cylindrospermopsins, anatoxin-a,
or guanitoxin. In addition, the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) endotoxins, being structural components
of Gram-negative prokaryotes are characteristic of cyanobacteria [47] but are apparently lacking in
eukaryotic microalgae. Thus, for these classes of cyanotoxins to co-occur with the potent phycotoxins
of marine waters, it is necessary (i) for toxigenic cyanobacteria to also be present and growing
in the environment, or (ii) for the cyanotoxins to be introduced into the microalgal environment.
Indeed, such an introduction occurred in the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, California,
where microcystin-producing Microcystis blooms entered the Bay waters from inland freshwaters via
river inflows. Mass deaths of sea otters (Enhydra lutris nereis) occurred due to the consumption of
marine shellfish which had accumulated the microcystins from the river inflows [64]. In this case,
analyses for other candidate cyanotoxins (nodularin and anatoxin-a) and for marine phycotoxins
(okadaic acid and yessotoxin) were negative. Another area of California, namely San Fransisco Bay,
has shown the presence of multiple toxin classes, often detected in molluscs [65]. From an analysis
of mussels, microcystins, domoic acid, diarrhetic shellfish toxins, and paralytic shellfish toxins were
identified with all four toxin classes detected in 37% of mussels.
However, some classes of cyanotoxins are not exclusively the products of cyanobacteria [66].
Saxitoxins have long been known to be produced by marine dinoflagellates, including species
of Alexandrium, Gymnodinium, and Pyrodinium [63] and by several strains of cyanobacterial
species, including Aphanizomenon spp., Dolichospermum circinale (formerly Anabaena circinalis),
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, Raphidiopsis brookii, Lyngbya wollei [67], and Scytonema crispum [68,69].
The neurotoxic diaminoacids, β-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA), N-(2-aminoethyl)glycine (AEG),
and 2,4-diaminobutyric acid (2,4-DAB), with LC-MS/MS used to confirm analytical specificity,
also appear to have multiple origins, including diverse cyanobacteria, marine and freshwater diatoms,
and a brackish coastal water dinoflagellate [70–77], and these toxins can also be present along with
microcystins and brevetoxins [78]. Wider origins of these neurotoxins are also indicated by the presence
of BMAA in the peptides found in chemoheterotrophic bacteria including environmentally widespread
Paenibacillus spp. [79,80].
3.2. Microbial Pathogens
A close association of cyanobacteria, including toxigenic species, typically occurs with other
microbes in aquatic and terrestrial environments [22,23]. The close proximity of the cyanobacteria
and their non-phototrophic, mutualistic partners can enable the two-way exchange of metabolites
and nutrients and provide a protective physical substrate for bacterial attachment and gene transfer.
Cyanobacterial extracellular polysaccharides and glycoprotein sheath materials can provide a substrate
for the bacterial attachment [23]. In addition to the association with a wide range of non-pathogenic



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

6 of 17

bacteria (e.g., [81]), marine, estuarine, and freshwater cyanobacteria can form close associations with
human pathogenic bacteria. When large blooms of cyanobacteria occur and people are exposed to such
blooms, then health complaints and non-specific symptoms are often reported [82]. Such symptoms
can include fever, pneumonia, and headaches as examples (reviewed in [82]). Therefore, exposure to
cyanobacterial blooms may have the added issue of multiple insults affecting human health, especially
in those individuals with underlying medical conditions.
In 1884, Robert Koch, the discoverer of the cholera bacillus, suggested from field studies that
“aquatic flora” might serve as environmental reservoirs of cholera [83]. Indeed, searches for possible
reservoirs of survival of toxigenic Vibrio cholerae 01 in a pond in Dhaka, Bangladesh, used for bathing,
swimming, washing, and drinking, indicated the seasonal survival of the pathogen in the extracellular
mucilage of the cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis [84]. Whilst the specificity of this association is not
extended to euglenoid microalgae, it does extend to the mucilaginous masses of other cyanobacteria,
including Microcystis colonies [85] and microcystin-producing Oscillatoria filaments [86]. Without the
application of more effective cyanobacterial risk management measures, the role of cyanobacteria in
providing inter-epidemic reservoirs of V. cholerae is likely to increase as compounding anthropogenic
pressures and climate change continue to result in increases in cyanobacterial population size, seasonal
duration, and geographical spread [4]. Populations of other potentially pathogenic Vibrio spp. have
increased from 2000 to 2018 in the Neuse River Estuary, North Carolina, USA but no correlations
were apparent with changes in temperature, salinity, or dissolved oxygen concentration, factors which
have influenced Vibrio abundance elsewhere [87]. The eutrophic estuary waters contain abundant
blooms including microalgae and cyanobacteria [88] although whether the cyanobacteria are physically
associated with the potentially pathogenic Vibrio spp. in the Neuse water is not apparent.
Although the waterborne human pathogenic protozoon Cyclospora was initially thought to be a
cyanobacterium, this is not so, and the protzoon is able to cause diarrhea, sickness, and abdominal
pain, similar to the protozoa Cryptosporidium parvum and Giardia lamblia [89]. An increased abundance
of potential microcystin-producing cyanobacteria (Aphanocapsa and Microcystis spp.) was observed
with Cryptosporidium and Giardia spp. in a reservoir supplying drinking water to the metropolitan
Belo Horizonte area, southeastern Brazil [90]. It is notable that waterbody conditions which favor
the persistence of Cryptosporidium and Giardia spp., including nutrient enrichment and high retention
times, can also enhance cyanobacterial growth [23], increasing the potential for co-occurrence and
co-exposure to pathogenic protozoa and cyanotoxins.
3.3. Metals
Relations between cyanobacteria and metals constitute a large field. Of toxicological relevance are
(i) the chronic and acute effects of metals on the growth, metabolism, and survival of cyanobacteria
and (ii) the ability of cyanobacteria to accumulate, detoxify, metabolize, and sequester metals [91–93].
Depending on growth conditions, the effects of dissolved metal ions (e.g., Ca, Cu, Pb, Cd) can include
both the inhibition and stimulation of Microcystis blooms [94], and the presence of copper may affect
the detoxication of e.g., nodularin by disrupting microbes that may degrade this cyanotoxin [95].
Copper is often used as a biocide to lyse cyanobacterial cells during blooms. Although successful,
in the case of e.g., Microcystis, this has had the effect of releasing cyanotoxins from an intracellular
pool to an extracellular pool with the result that liver damage may result after drinking water from
which cyanobacterial cells and cell debris have been removed, but without the assured removal of
extracellular microcystin [96]. Furthermore, if the copper used for lysis is not effectively removed
during drinking water treatment, then this may subsequently also pose an additional toxicological
burden on people and animals.
Research on metals and cyanotoxins has largely focused on the effects of iron on microcystin
production. Pioneering studies on iron limitation in axenic Microcystis aeruginosa cultures revealed
increases in microcystin-RR and -LR (MC-RR, MC-LR) production [97]. Early sampling and analytical
procedures in the latter study are likely to have resulted in the combined analysis of the former



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

7 of 17

intra- and extracellular pools. Further investigations into microcystin production by M. aeruginosa,
Microcystis novacekii, and Phormidium autumnale cultures have included increases upon iron addition
but also increases upon iron limitation during culture. Positive effects of copper, zinc, and manganese
ions on microcystin production under conditions of metal enrichment of, and metal limitation of,
cyanobacterial cultures have also been observed, possibly indicating physiological and biochemical
roles of the metals in microcystin biosynthesis, in addition to a siderophore function for microcystins
in metal acquisition [98]. No specific differences in anatoxin-a production by P. autumnale were found
in response to growth under an environmentally encountered, low-to-high range of iron or copper
concentrations [99].
Direct interaction between cyanotoxin molecules and metals has been investigated in vitro
with two classes of cyanotoxins. The purified post-synaptic neuromuscular blocking neurotoxin,
BMAA, is a potent chelator of divalent metal cations including copper and zinc [100]. Whether such
chelation occurs in BMAA-producing cyanobacterial cells and, if so, if toxicity is thereby influenced,
is not known. Divalent copper and zinc binding occur to at least three purified microcystins
(MC-LR, MC-LW, MC-LF) with formation constants (Ki ) indicating that all three cyanotoxins are
medium-strength metal ligands. Single amino acid substitution in the heptapeptide microcystin
ring (arginine versus tryptophan, or versus phenylalanine) did not influence the strength of the
metal-microcystin association [101]. Whether metal-microcystin binding influences toxicity and
whether this binding occurs in the cyanobacterial producer-cells and/or in the surrounding water after
microcystin release are also unknown. However, this possibility is viewed alongside the increasing
evidence for the combined toxicity of microcystins and metals: co-exposure bioassays involving
MC-LR and copper, at environmentally encountered concentrations, have revealed synergistic toxicity
against the early development of the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Uptake of the toxins by the fish involved
microcystin and copper transporters [35]. Toxicity assessment of BMAA and methylmercury to primary
neurocortical cells show a synergistic toxicity [102] and assessment of other cyanotoxins with such
organic forms of metals is required.
3.4. Pesticides
One cyanotoxin, the phosphorylated cyclic N-hydroxyguanidine, guanitoxin (anatoxin-a(S)) exerts
toxicity via the irreversible inhibition of acetylcholinesterases in common with organophosphorus
pesticides [6,103]. No other cyanotoxins are known to have the same modes of action as those of
synthetic pesticides. The co-occurrence of cyanobacteria, and of pesticides, including herbicides,
fungicides, and insecticides, is a concern in water resources with a high human usage and dependency.
For example, in paddy fields nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria can serve as a valuable biofertilizer and
contribute to rice production and an aim is to reduce the negative impacts of the pesticides on
cyanobacterial growth [104]. Nevertheless, the inadvertent entry of pesticides into waterbodies
from human activities, especially agriculture, appears to be a ubiquitous process and numerous
investigations into the inhibitory impacts of pesticides on aquatic biota have occurred. A wide-ranging
survey of investigations into the effects of pesticides in aquatic microbes included the effects of
insecticides, herbicides, and fungicides on the viability of cyanobacteria, with overall dose-dependent
growth inhibition occurring [105]. Most of the named cyanobacteria in this survey were members
of cyanotoxin-producing taxa. However, investigations to date do not appear to have included
relations between pesticides and the production and impacts of cyanotoxins. In addition to the
possible contribution of pesticides (and metals) alongside cyanotoxins to the mass mortalities of Lesser
Flamingos in East African lakes [51,52,106], both pesticides and cyanotoxins may contribute to the
marked decline in the American Alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) population in eutrophic Lake
Apopka, Florida, with high egg failure and anomalous endocrine function [107].
The adult invertebrate grazer Daphnia pulicaria was exposed to the purified pesticide carbaryl
(1-naphthyl methylcarbamate) plus whole cells of microcystin-producing M. aeruginosa at a range
of sublethal concentrations [108]. The actual dose of microcystin(s) assimilated per animal was



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

8 of 17

estimated from the analysis of whole D. pulicaria by ELISA, although the immunoassay used does not
distinguish between authentic microcystin(s) and a range of microcystin detoxification products [109].
However, at a range of sublethal carbaryl concentrations, adverse effects on egg numbers per female,
delayed maturation, offspring mortality, and body malformations occurred with outcomes increased
by the addition of M. aeruginosa cells. Additive and synergistic actions between carbaryl and the
microcystin-containing cyanobacterial cells were indicated [108]. Hinojosa et al. [39] have recently
provided a significant example of the needed, quantitative, baseline studies on the toxicology of
pesticides in co-occurrence with cyanotoxins. In vitro bioassays using the human neuroblastoma cell line
SH-SY5Y evaluated the effects of individual, versus combined exposure to purified cylindrospermopsin
and chlorpyrifos [O,O-diethyl O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinol) phosphorothionate]. Cytotoxicity and
mechanistic endpoint comparisons after 24 and 48 h of exposure, at environmentally relevant
concentrations, indicated antagonistic action between the pesticide and cyanotoxin [39].
The herbicide glyphosate has been used widely to control plants and it has been shown
to occur in waterbodies, with toxicity demonstrated [110]. Its presence in waterways is well
known and has been shown to have an adverse effect on the growth of cyanobacteria, including
Microcystis [111]. Further effects of glyphosate on cyanobacteria include enhanced extracellular release
of microcystins [112] with the potential for organisms to respond to combinations of microcystins and
glyphosate, such as the mussel Unio pictorium [113].
3.5. Microplastic and Nanoplastic Particles and Contaminants
The global occurrence of microscopic plastic particles (microplastics) throughout the world’s oceans
has been recognized for several years [114] and their further occurrence in human feces, freshwater lakes
and rivers, groundwater, and estuaries is becoming increasingly recognized [115,116]. Cyanobacteria in
both marine and freshwaters are among the wide range of microbes which, with mineral particles,
attach to microplastics, forming a biofilm. The adhesion of microbes, with subsequent development
of an extracellular polysaccharide layer, may contribute to the sinking or buoyancy properties of
these complexes, and to the further sorption of metals, particularly, iron and manganese [117].
Among toxicological hazards presented by the microplastics accumulating in water resources
are the endocrine-disrupting bisphenol contaminants, including bisphenols A, S, F, and AF [118].
Cylindrospermopsin is a strong candidate for toxicity evaluation in combination with bisphenols since
(i) its wide geographical occurrence in freshwaters is becoming more apparent; (ii) a high percentage
of the total cylindrospermopsin pool is extracellular when the C. raciborskii producer cells are still
intact, and (iii) the cyanotoxin exhibits a wide range of actions, including hepatotoxicity, inhibition
of protein synthesis, genotoxicity, and potential carcinogenicity [6,9,40]. A complex of interactions
between purified cylindrospermopsin and bisphenols was found in in vitro bioassays using HepG2
cells. Whilst bisphenols alone reduced cell viability or induced DNA double strand breaks, antagonistic
activity of bisphenol against these actions by cylindrospermopsin was indicated. However, further
possible additive or synergistic effects on HepG2 gene deregulation were also indicated by co-exposure
to the bisphenols plus cylindrospermopsin [40]. No bioassays involving purified microcystins
with micro- or nanoplastics are yet apparent, although toxicologically significant interactions have
been reported between nanoplastics and Microcystis aeruginosa cells [118], and laboratory-ware
plastics are also known to bind microcystins from solution [119,120] and plastic nanoparticles
may also bind glyphosate [111]. Amino-modified polystyrene nanoplastics increase microcystin
production by the cyanobacterial cells and also increase the extracellular release of the toxin(s)
according to microcystin immunoassay. The prevalence and proximity of microplastics, nanoplastics,
and cyanobacteria [115–117], and widespread ability of the latter to produce microcystins [5,8,9,11,12]
require further research into the toxicological interactions of these ubiquitous synthetic and naturally
occurring, biological health hazards.



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

9 of 17

4. Implications for Water Safety Guidelines, Legislation, and Water Treatment
The need to provide safe recreational and bathing waters and drinking water provides multiple
challenges due to the potential for combinations of toxic compounds, with possible synergistic and
additive effects, to occur at concentrations deemed unsafe for human health [121,122]. In order to
prevent potential adverse toxicities arising from exposure to multiple toxins, to cyanotoxins plus
microbial pathogens, and to cyanotoxins plus more recently recognized health hazards including
microplastics, the ability of water safety guideline values (GV) and legislation to provide adequate
safety margins in the event of potential multiple exposures need to be verified. In several cases, the same
drinking water treatment technologies are used for the removal and/or destruction of cyanotoxins, and
of other toxicants (Table 2).
Table 2. Examples of water treatment processes for the removal of potentially toxic compounds.
Toxicant

Treatment Process

References

Fungal/microbial toxins
Pesticides
Microplastics
Metals
Microcystins
Anatoxin-a
Saxitoxins
Cylindrospermopsin

SF, C
Oz, AC,
C, U
C, A
AC, Ox, Oz, Cl
Oz, Ox, Cl
AC, Cl
AC, Oz, Cl

[123]
[124–126]
[127,128]
[129,130]
[121,131]
[132]
[133]
[134,135]

AC, activated carbon; Ox, oxidation; Ozonation; Cl, chlorination; C, coagulation; A, adsorption; U, ultrafiltration;
SF, sand filtration.

Consequently, in order to prevent or reduce toxicity during events when co-occurrence arises,
then the efficacy of such multipurpose water treatment technologies needs to be verified, and increased
where needed, with respect to each of the classes of cyanotoxins and of additional toxicants in the raw
water. Furthermore, the development and implementation of advanced water treatment technologies
should take into account the potential for real-world exposures to a wide range of toxicants and
scenarios, from e.g., natural occurrence [121], to deliberate or man-made additions [136]. Such events
can potentially occur alone or in combination and during times of high-water usage which may include
cyanobacterial blooms in source waters, the potential for multiple exposures should be acknowledged
and contingency plans should consider this issue. Furthermore, often contingencies may include the
switching of source waters and if different, but potentially hazardous situations exist in these waters,
then alternative or enhanced treatment technologies, or e.g., the temporary provision of bottled waters,
may be required.
Understanding of the health risks presented by cyanotoxins has progressed considerably [6–9],
but the risk management of microcystins, and of microcystin-producing cyanobacteria has been the
focus of guideline derivation for health protection [137]. GVs in addition to those for microcystins,
including for cylindrospermopsin [121,134] are also being derived. Although GVs for microplastics
do not exist, the WHO has derived GVs for six monomers which can leach from the plastics, ranging
from 0.3 to 300 µg/L [138]. Some metals and pesticides also have GVs for drinking water and are
also generally in the low µg/L range [139]. Whether the GV values, with in-built safety margins,
accommodate the additive and synergistic toxicities which can arise due to cyanotoxin co-occurrences
and to the co-occurrence of cyanotoxins with other toxicants including microplastics derivatives
(Section 3.5) merits investigation.
5. Concluding Remarks
Following wildlife-, domestic animal-, and human-intoxications due to exposure to cyanobacterial
mass populations, the volume of research over recent years into the toxicology and toxinology
of cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins has increased greatly and such growth continues e.g., [1,5,7,8].



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

10 of 17

In recognition of the co-occurrence of multiple variants within individual classes of cyanotoxins,
of different cyanotoxin classes, and of cyanotoxins plus phycotoxins, it is encouraging that
physico-chemical methods for the co-analysis of these combinations are being developed [5,19–21,140].
However, since cyanobacterial mass populations commonly develop in waterbodies which are under
intensive anthropogenic use (e.g., for domestic, industrial, and agricultural wastewater discharge,
abstraction for drinking water treatment, recreation, crop irrigation, and fisheries) it should be
anticipated that toxigenic cyanobacteria can co-occur with a wide range of additional biological and
chemical health hazards. Indeed, sufficient examples exist, reviewed here, of animal and human
health incidents and intoxications associated with multiple health hazards including cyanobacteria
and cyanotoxins, and other contributory biological toxins, microbial pathogens and anthropogenic
chemical products. Whilst further research on the toxicity of the established and emerging cyanotoxins
via bioassays is needed, including defined cyanotoxin combinations and environmental materials [15],
more cyanotoxin bioassays including other environmental toxins and toxicants, as exemplified in
Table 1, are required. Data on the toxicity of cyanotoxins in combination with other biotoxins and
chemical toxic compounds, may then contribute to the assessment of whether guideline values and
legislation for health protection can also accommodate multiple exposure to cyanotoxins plus the
other biological and chemical agents. The route of administration of cyanotoxins may also affect the
toxicological outcome or the mixtures of compounds that may be present, such as lead and particular
matter (PM2.5 and PM10 ) that can occur as airborne components [141,142], potentially in addition to
cyanotoxins [143].
The recognition of the multiple occurrence and combined toxicity of cyanotoxins, plus additional
toxicants and pathogens, is a growing area of research and such co-occurrences may increase further
with the growth of the human population, increasing demands upon water resources and climate
change. However, such co-occurrence(s) may have already adversely affected human health in an
earlier period. High concentrations of mercury, of phosphate consistent with eutrophic conditions, plus
16S rRNA amplicons indicating Planktothrix and Microcystis blooms (and thus potentially microcystins),
have been found in dated sediment profiles from former reservoirs serving the ancient former Mayan
city of Tikal in Guatemala. This potentially toxic combination may have contributed to the demise of
the Mayan population and of the city in the ninth Century CE [144].
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

Carmichael, W.W. (Ed.) The Water Environment: Algal Toxins and Health; Plenum Press: New York, NY, USA,
1981; p. 491.
Falconer, I.R. (Ed.) Algal Toxins in Seafood and Drinking Water; Academic Press: London, UK, 1993; p. 224.
Codd, G.A.; Jefferies, T.M.; Keevil, C.W.; Potter, E. (Eds.) Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins;
Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, UK, 1994; p. 191.
Huisman, J.; Matthijs, H.C.P.; Visser, P.M. (Eds.) Harmful Cyanobacteria; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
2005; p. 241.
Meriluoto, J.; Spoof, L.; Codd, G.A. (Eds.) Handbook of Cyanobacterial Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis;
Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; p. 548.
Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A. Cyanotoxins. In Ecology of Cyanobacteria II: Their Diversity in Space and Time;
Whitton, B.A., Ed.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2012; pp. 651–675.
Testai, E.; Scardala, S.; Vichi, S.; Buratti, F.M.; Funari, E. Risk to human health associated with the
environmental occurrence of cyanobacterial neurotoxic alkaloids anatoxins and saxitoxins. Crit. Rev. Toxicol.
2016, 46, 385–418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Svircĕv, Z.; Drobac, D.; Tokodi, N.; Mijović, B.; Codd, G.A.; Meriluoto, J. Toxicology of microcystins with
reference to cases of human intoxications and epidemiological investigations of exposure to cyanobacteria
and cyanotoxins. Arch. Toxicol. 2017, 91, 621–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

11 of 17

Buratti, F.M.; Manganelli, M.; Vichi, S.; Stefanelli, M.; Scardala, S.; Testai, E.; Funari, E. Cyanotoxins:
Producing organisms, occurrence, toxicity, mechanism of action and human health toxicological risk
evaluation. Arch. Toxicol. 2017, 91, 1049–1130. [PubMed]
Pichardo, S.; Caméan, A.M.; Jos, A. In vitro toxicological assessment of cylindrospermopsin: A review. Toxins
2017, 16, 402. [CrossRef]
Metcalf, J.S.; Souza, N.R. Cyanobacteria and their toxins. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2019, 11, 125–148.
Svircĕv, Z.; Lalić, D.; Savić, G.B.; Tokodi, N.; Backovic, D.D.; Chen, L.; Meriluoto, J.; Codd, G.A. Global
geographical and historical overview of cyanotoxins distribution and cyanobacterial poisonings. Arch. Toxicol.
2019, 93, 2429–2481. [CrossRef]
Francis, G. Poisonous Australian lake. Nature 1878, 18, 11–12. [CrossRef]
Codd, G.A.; Morton, H.; Baker, P.D. George Francis, a pioneer in the investigation of the quality of South
Australia’s drinking water sources (1878–1883). Trans. R. Soc. S. Aust. 2015, 139, 164–170. [CrossRef]
Blaha, L.; Camean, A.M.; Fessard, V.; Gutierrez-Praena, D.; Jos, A.; Marie, B.; Metcalf, J.S.; Pichardo, S.;
Puerto, M.; Torokne, A.; et al. Bioassay use in the field of cyanobacteria. In Handbook of Cyanobacterial
Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 272–279.
Meriluoto, J.; Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A. Selection of analytical methodology for cyanotoxin analysis. In Handbook
of Cyanobacterial Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 308–312.
Kurmayer, R.; Sivonen, K.; Wilmotte, A.; Salmaso, N. (Eds.) Molecular Tools for the Detection and Quantitation
of Toxigenic Cyanobacteria; John Wiley and Sons: Chichester, UK, 2017; p. 402.
Turner, A.D.; Waack, J.; Lewis, A.; Edwards, C.; Lawton, L. Development and single-laboratory validation of
a UHPLC-MS/MS method for quantitation of microcystins and nodularin in natural water, cyanobacteria,
shellfish and algal supplement tablet powders. J. Chromatogr. B 2018, 1074–1075, 111–123. [CrossRef]
Gimenéz-Campillo, C.; Pastor-Belda, M.; Campillo, N.; Arroyo-Manzanares, N.; Hernández-Córdoba, M.;
Viñas, P. Determination of cyanotoxins and phycotoxins in seawater and algae-based supplements using ionic
liquids and liquid chromatography with time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Toxins 2019, 11, 610. [CrossRef]
Roy-Lachapelle, A.; Duy, S.V.; Munoz, G.; Dinh, Q.T.; Bahl, E.; Simon, D.F.; Sauvé, S. Analysis of multiclass
cyanotoxins (microcystins, anabaenopeptins, cylindrospermopsin and anatoxins) in lake water using on-line
SPE liquid chromatography high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Anal. Methods 2019, 11, 5289.
[CrossRef]
Di Pofi, G.; Favero, G.; di Gregorio, F.N.; Ferretti, E.; Viaggiu, E.; Lucentini, L. Multi-residue ultra performance
liquid chromataography-high resolution mass spectrometry method for the analysis of 21 cyanotoxins in
surface water for human consumption. Talanta 2020, 211, 120738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Canter-Lund, H.; Lund, J.W.G. Freshwater Algae: Their Microscopic World Explored; Biopress Limited: Bristol,
UK, 1995; p. 360.
Whitton, B.A. (Ed.) Ecology of Cyanobacteria II: Their Diversity in Space and Time; Springer: Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, 2012; p. 760.
Islam, M.S.; Miah, M.A.; Hasan, M.K.; Sack, R.B.; Albert, M.J. Detection of non-culturable Vibrio cholera 01
associated with a cyanobacterium from an aquatic environment in Bangladesh. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.
1994, 88, 298–299. [CrossRef]
Timbrell, J.A. Introduction to Toxicology; Taylor & Francis: Bristol, UK, 1995; p. 167.
Fitzgeorge, R.B.; Clark, S.A.; Keevil, C.W. Routes of intoxication. In Detection Methods for Cyanobacterial Toxins;
Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, UK, 1994; pp. 69–74.
Chia, M.A.; Kramer, B.J.; Jankowiak, J.G.; do Carmo Bittencourt-Oliveira, M.; Gobler, C.J. The individual and
combined effects of the cyanotoxins, anatoxin-a and microcystin-LR, on the growth, toxin production and
nitrogen fixation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic algae. Toxins 2019, 11, 43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Rymuszka, A.; Sieroslawska, A. Cytotoxic and immunotoxic effects of the mixture containing cyanotoxins on
carp cells following in vitro exposure. Cent. Eur. J. Immunol. 2013, 38, 159–163. [CrossRef]
Li, Q.; Gu, P.; Zhang, C.; Luo, X.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, Z. Combined toxic effects of anatoxin-a and
microcystin-LR on submerged macrophytes and biofilms. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 389, 122053. [CrossRef]
Lindsay, J.; Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A. Protection against the toxicity of microcystin-LR and cylindrospermopsin
in Artemia salina, and Daphnia spp. by pretreatment with cyanobacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Toxicon
2006, 48, 995–1001. [CrossRef]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.
43.

44.

45.
46.
47.
48.

49.

50.

12 of 17

Pinheiro, C.; Azevedo, J.; Campos, A.; Vasconcelos, V.; Loureiro, S. The interactive effects of microcystin-LR
and cylindrospermopsin on the growth rate of the freshwater alga Chlorella Vulgaris. Ecotoxicology 2016, 25,
745–758. [CrossRef]
Reinikainen, M.; Meriluoto, J.A.O.; Spoof, L.; Harada, K.-I. The toxicities of a polyunsaturated fatty acid and
a microcystin to Daphnia Magna. Environ. Toxicol. 2001, 16, 444–448. [CrossRef]
Wang, L.; He, L.; Zeng, H.; Fu, W.; Wang, J.; Tan, Y.; Zheng, C.; Qiu, Z.; Luo, J.; Lv, C.; et al. Low dose
microcystin-LR antagonises aflatoxin B1 induced hepatocarcinogenesis through decreased cytochrome P450
1A2 expression and aflatoxin B1-DNA adduct generation. Chemosphere 2020, 248, 126036. [CrossRef]
Meneely, J.P.; Hašlová, J.; Krska, R.; Elliott, C.T. Assessing the combined toxicity of the natural toxins,
aflatoxin B1 , fumonisin B1 and microcystin-LR by high content analysis. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2018, 121,
527–540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wei, H.; Wang, S.; Xu, E.G.; Liu, J.; Li, X.; Wang, Z. Synergistic toxicity of microcystin-LR and Cu to zebrafish
(Danio rerio). Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 713, 736393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Li, E.; Zhang, L.; Wang, X.; Song, L. Combined toxic effects and mechanisms of
microcystin-LR and copper on Vallisneria natans (Lous.) Hara seedlings. J. Hazard. Mater. 2017, 328, 108–116.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wang, Z.; Xiao, B.; Song, L.; Wu, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C. Effects of microcystin-LR, linear alkylbenzene
sulfonate and their mixture on lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) seeds and seedlings. Ecotoxicology 2011, 20, 803–814.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wan, X.; Steinman, A.D.; Shu, X.; Cao, Q.; Yao, L.; Xie, L. Combined toxic effects of microcystin-LR and
phenanthrene on growth and antioxidant system of duckweed (Lemna gibba L.). Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2019,
185, 109668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hinojosa, M.G.; Prieto, A.I.; Gutiérrez-Praena, D.; Moreno, F.J.; Caméan, A.M.; Jos, A. In vitro assessment of
the combination of cylindrospermopsin and the organophosphate chlorpyrifos on the human neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y cell line. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 191, 110222. [CrossRef]
Hercog, C.; Štern, A.; Maisanaba, S.; Filipič, M.; Bojana, Ž. Plastics in cyanobacterial blooms—genotoxic
effects of binary mixtures of cylindrospermopsin and bisphenols in HepG2 cells. Toxins 2020, 12, 219.
[CrossRef]
Fiore, S.M.F.; de Lima, S.T.; Carmichael, W.W.; McKinnie, S.M.K.; Checkan, J.R.; Moore, B.S. Guanitoxin,
renaming a cyanobacterial organophosphate toxin. Harmful Algae 2020, 92, 101937. [CrossRef]
Spoof, L.; Catherine, A. Appendix 3: Tables of microcystins and nodularins. In Handbook of Cyanobacterial
Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 526–537.
Robillot, C.; Vinh, J.E.; Puiseux-Dao, S.; Hennion, M.-C. Hepatotoxin production kinetics of the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa PCC 7820, as determined by HPLC-mass spectrometry and protein
phosphatase bioassay. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000, 34, 3372–3378. [CrossRef]
Wimmer, K.M.;
Strangman, W.;
Wright, J.L.C. 7-deoxy-desulfo-cylindrospermopsin and
7-dexoy-desulfo-12-acetylcylindrospermopsin: Two new cylindrospermopsin analogs isolated from a Thai
strain of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. Harmful Algae 2014, 37, 203–206. [CrossRef]
Ward, C.J.; Codd, G.A. Comparative toxicity of four microcystins of different hydrophobicities to the
protozoan, Tetrahymena Pyriformis. J. Appl. Microbiol. 1999, 86, 874–882. [CrossRef]
Harada, K.-I.; Ogawa, K.; Kimura, Y.; Murata, H.; Suzuki, M. Microcystins from Anabaena flos-aquae NRC
525-17. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 1991, 4, 535–540. [CrossRef]
Monteiro, S.; Santos, R.; Bláha, L.; Codd, G.A. Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins. In Handbook of Cyanobacterial
Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 165–172.
Pouria, S.; de Andrade, A.; Barbosa, J.; Cavalcanti, R.L.; Barreto, V.T.; Ward, C.J.; Preiser, W.; Poon, G.K.;
Neild, G.H.; Codd, G.A. Fatal microcystin intoxication in haemodialysis unit in Caruaru, Brazil. Lancet 1998,
352, 21–26. [CrossRef]
Jochimsen, E.M.; Carmichael, W.W.; An, J.S.; Cardo, D.M.; Cookson, S.T.; Holmes, C.E.; Antunes, M.B.; de
Melo Filho, D.A.; Lyra, T.M.; Barreto, V.S.; et al. Liver failure and death after exposure to microcystins at a
hemodialysis center in Brazil. N. Engl. J. Med. 1998, 338, 873–878. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Carmichael, W.W.; Azevedo, S.M.; An, J.S.; Molica, R.J.; Jochimsen, E.M.; Lau, S.; Rinehart, K.L.; Shaw, G.R.;
Eaglesham, G.K. Human fatalities from cyanobacteria: Chemical and biological evidence for cyanotoxins.
Environ. Health Perspect. 2001, 109, 663–668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

56.
57.
58.
59.

60.

61.
62.
63.
64.

65.

66.
67.
68.

69.

70.

13 of 17

Krienitz, L.; Ballot, A.; Kotut, K.; Wiegand, C.; Pütz, S.; Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A.; Pflugmacher, S.
Contribution of hot spring cyanobacteria to the mysterious deaths of Lesser Flamingos at Lake Bogoria,
Kenya. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2003, 43, 141–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Krienitz, L.; Ballot, A.; Caspar, P.; Codd, G.A.; Kotut, K.; Metcalf, J.S.; Morrison, L.F.; Pflugmacher, S.;
Wiegand, C. Contribution of toxic cyanobacteria to massive deaths of Lesser Flamingos at saline-alkaline
lakes. Proc. Int. Assoc. Theor. Appl. Limnol. 2005, 29, 783–786. [CrossRef]
Pennycott, T.; Young, F.M.; Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A. Necrotic enteritis in mute swans associated with
cyanobacterial toxins. Vet. Rec. 2004, 154, 575–576.
Landsberg, J.H.; Hendrickson, J.; Tabuchi, M.; Kiryu, Y.; Williams, B.J.; Tomlinson, M.C. A large-scale sustained
fish kill in the St John’s River, Florida: A complex consequence of cyanobacterial blooms. Harmful Algae 2020,
92, 101771. [CrossRef]
Hawkins, P.R.; Runnegar, M.T.C.; Jackson, A.R.B.; Falconer, I.R. Severe hepatotoxicity caused by the tropical
cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenaya and Subba Raju
isolated from a domestic water supply. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1985, 50, 11292–11295. [CrossRef]
Turner, P.C.; Gammie, A.J.; Hollinrake, K.; Codd, G.A. Pneumonia associated with contact with cyanobacteria.
Br. Med. J. 1990, 300, 1440–1441. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Yu, S.-Z. Drinking water and primary liver cancer. In Primary Liver Cancer; Tang, Z.Y., Wu, M.C., Xia, S.S., Eds.;
China Academic Publishers: New York, NY, USA, 1989; pp. 30–37.
Yu, S.-Z. Primary prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 1995, 10, 674–682.
[CrossRef]
Ueno, Y.; Nagata, S.; Tsutsumi, T.; Hasegawa, A.; Watanabe, M.; Park, H.D.; Chen, G.-C.; Chen, G.; Yu, S.-Z.
Detection of microcystins, a blue-green algal hepatotoxin, in drinking water sampled in Haimen and Fusui,
endemic areas of primary liver cancer in China, by highly sensitive immunoassay. Carcinogenesis 1996, 17,
1317–1321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zheng, C.; Zeng, H.; Lin, H.; Wang, J.; Feng, Z.; Chen, J.-A.; Luo, J.; Luo, Y.; Huang, Y.; Wang, L.; et al. Serum
microcystin levels positively linked with risk of hepatocellular carcinoma: A case-control study in southwest
China. Hepatology 2017, 66, 1519–1528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Rasmussen, S.A.; Andersen, A.J.C.; Andersen, N.G.; Nielsen, K.F.; Hansen, P.J.; Larsen, T.O. Chemical
diversity, origin, and analysis of phycotoxins. J. Nat. Prod. 2016, 79, 662–673. [CrossRef]
Vilariño, N.; Louzao, M.C.; Abal, P.; Cagide, E.; Carrera, C.; Vieytes, M.R.; Botana, L.M. Human poisoning
from marine toxins: Unknowns for optimal consumer protection. Toxins 2018, 10, 324. [CrossRef]
Akbar, M.A.; Yusof, N.Y.M.; Tahir, N.I.; Ahmad, A.; Usup, G.; Sahrani, F.K.; Bunawan, H. Biosynthesis of
saxitoxin in marine dinoflagellates: An omics perspective. Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 103. [CrossRef]
Miller, M.A.; Kudela, R.M.; Mekebri, A.; Crane, D.; Oates, S.C.; Tinker, M.T.; Staedler, M.; Miller, W.A.;
Toy-Choutka, S.; Dominik, C.; et al. Evidence for a novel marine harmful algal bloom: Cyanotoxin
(microcystin) transfer from land to sea otters. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e12576. [CrossRef]
Peacock, M.B.; Gibble, C.M.; Senn, D.B.; Cloern, J.E.; Kudela, R.M. Blurred lines: Multiple freshwater and
marine algal toxins at the land-sea interface of San Fransisco Bay, California. Harmful Algae 2018, 73, 138–147.
[CrossRef]
Codd, G.A.; Nunn, P.B. Cyanotoxin production beyond the cyanobacteria. Toxicon 2019, 168, 93–94. [CrossRef]
Ballot, A.; Bernard, C.; Fastner, J. Saxitoxin and analogues. In Handbook of Cyanobacterial Monitoring and
Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley: Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 149–154.
Smith, F.M.J.; Wood, S.A.; Wilks, T.; Kelly, D.; Broady, P.A.; Williamson, W.; Gaw, S. Survery of Scytonema
(Cyanobacteria) and associated saxitoxins in the littoral zone of recreational lakes in Canterbury, New Zealand.
Phycologia 2012, 51, 542–551.
Cullen, A.; D’Agostino, P.M.; Mazmouz, R.; Pickford, R.; Wood, S.A.; Nielan, B.A. Insertions within the
saxitoxin biosynthetic gene cluster result in differential toxin profiles. ACS Chem. Biol. 2018, 13, 3107–3114.
[PubMed]
Cox, P.A.; Banack, S.A.; Murch, S.J.; Rasmussen, U.; Tien, G.; Bidigare, R.R.; Metcalf, J.S.; Morrison, L.F.;
Codd, G.A.; Bergman, B. Diverse taxa of cyanobacteria produce β-N-methylamino-L-alanine, a neurotoxic
amino acid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 5074–5078. [PubMed]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

71.

72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.

80.
81.
82.

83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

88.
89.
90.

91.
92.
93.
94.

14 of 17

Metcalf, J.S.; Banack, S.A.; Lindsay, J.; Morrison, L.F.; Cox, P.A.; Codd, G.A. Co-occurrence of
β-N-methylamino-L-alanine a neurotoxic amino acid with other cyanobacterial toxins in British waterbodies,
1990–2004. Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 10, 702–708. [PubMed]
Faassen, E.J.; Gillissen, F.; Lürling, M. A comparative study of three analytical methods for the determination
of the neurotoxin BMAA in cyanobacteria. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e36667. [PubMed]
Jiang, L.; Eriksson, J.; Lage, S.; Jonasson, S.; Shams, S.; Mehine, M.; Ilag, L.L.; Rasmussen, U. Diatoms: A novel
source for the neurotoxin BMAA in aquatic environments. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e84578.
Violi, J.P.; Facey, J.A.; Mitrovic, S.M.; Colville, A.; Rodgers, K.J. Production of β-methylamino-L-alanine
(BMAA) and its isomers in freshwater diatoms. Toxins 2019, 11, 1109–1138.
Jiang, L.; Ilag, L.L. Detection of endogenous BMAA in dinoflagellate (Heterocapsa triquetra) hints at evolutionary
conservation and environmental concern. Pubraw Sci. 2014, 2, 1–8.
Metcalf, J.S.; Banack, S.A.; Wessel, R.A.; Lester, M.; Pim, J.G.; Cassani, J.R.; Cox, P.A. Toxin analysis of
freshwater cyanobacterial and marine harmful algal blooms on the west coast of Florida and implications for
estuarine environments. Neurotox. Res. 2020. [CrossRef]
O’Neal, R.M.; Chen, C.-H.; Reynolds, C.S.; Meghal, S.K.; Koeppe, R.E. The ‘neurotoxicity’ of
L-2,4-diaminobutyric acid. Biochem. J. 1968, 106, 699–706.
Schneider, T.; Simpson, C.; Desai, P.; Tucker, M.; Lobner, D. Neurotoxicity of isomers of the environmental
toxin L-BMAA. Toxicon 2020, 184, 175–179. [PubMed]
Nunn, P.B.; Codd, G.A. Metabolic solutions to the biosynthesis of some diaminomonocarboxylic acids in
nature: Formation in cyanobacteria of the neurotoxins 3-N-methyl-2,3-diaminopropanoic acid (BMAA) and
2,4-diaminobutanoic acid (2,4-DAB). Phytochemistry 2017, 144, 2530270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nunn, P.B.; Codd, G.A. Environmental distribution of the neurotoxin L-BMAA in Paenibacillus species.
Toxicol. Res. 2019, 8, 781–783. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tu, J.; Chen, L.; Gao, S.; Zhang, J.; Bi, C.; Lu, N.; Lu, Z. Obtaining genome sequences of mutualistic bacteria
in single Microcystis colonies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 5047. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Stewart, I.; Webb, P.M.; Schluter, P.J.; Shaw, G.R. Recreational and occupational field exposure to freshwater
cyanobacteria—A review of anecdotal and case reports, epidemiological studies and the challenges for
epidemiologic assessment. Environ. Health 2006, 5, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Koch, R. An address on cholera and its bacillus. Br. Med. J. 1884, 2, 453.
Islam, M.S.; Drasar, B.S.; Sack, R.B. Probable role of blue-green algae in maintaining endemicity and
seasonality of cholera in Bangladesh: A hypothesis. J. Diarrhoeal Dis. Res. 1994, 12, 245–256. [PubMed]
Islam, M.S.; Zaman, M.H.; Islam, M.S.; Ahmed, M.; Clemens, J.D. Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae.
Vaccine 2020, 38, A52–A62. [CrossRef]
Ahmed, M.S.; Raknussaman, M.; Akther, H.; Ahmed, S. The role of cyanobacteria blooms in cholera epidemic
in Bangladesh. J. Appl. Sci. 2007, 7, 1785–1789.
Froehlich, B.; Gonzalez, R.; Blackwood, D.; Lauer, K.; Noble, R. Decadal monitoring reveals an increase in
Vibrio spp. concentrations in the Neuse River Estuary, North Carolina, USA. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0215254.
[CrossRef]
Paerl, H.W.; Valdes, L.M.; Peierls, B.J.; Adolf, J.E.; Harding, L.W. Anthropogenic and climate influences on
the eutrophication of large estuarine ecosystems. Limnol. Oceanogr. 2006, 51, 448–462. [CrossRef]
Marshall, M.M.; Naumovitz, D.; Ortega, Y.; Sterling, C.R. Waterborne protozoan pathogens.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 1997, 10, 67–85. [CrossRef]
Lopes, A.M.M.B.; Gomes, L.N.L.; de Cerqueira, M.F.; Filho, C.R.M.; von Sperling, E.; de Pádua, V.L. Dynamic
of pathogenic protozoa and cyanobacteria in a reservoir used for water supply in southeastern Brazil.
Eng. Sanit. E Ambient. 2017, 22, 25–43. [CrossRef]
Fiore, M.F.; Trevors, J.T. Cell composition and metal tolerance in cyanobacteria. BioMetals 2017, 7, 83–103.
[CrossRef]
Baptista, M.S.; Vasconcelos, M.T. Cyanobacteria metal interactions: Requirements, Toxicity and ecological
implications. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2006, 32, 127–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ramakrishnan, B.; Megharaj, M.; Venkateswarlu, K.; Naidu, R.; Sethunathan, N. The impacts of environmental
pollutants on microalgae and cyanobacteria. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 40, 699–821. [CrossRef]
Gu, P.; Qi, L.; Zhang, W.; Zheng, Z.; Luo, X. Effects of different metal ions (Ca, Cu, Pb, Cd) on formation of
cyanobacterial blooms. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 189, 109976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

95.

15 of 17

Heresztyn, T.; Nicholson, B.C. Nodularin concentrations in Lake Alexandrina and Albert, South Australia,
during a bloom of the cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) Nodularia spumigena and degradation of the toxin.
Environ. Toxicol. Water Qual. 1997, 12, 273–282. [CrossRef]
96. Falconer, I.R.; Beresford, A.M.; Runnegar, M.T. Evidence of liver damage by toxin from a bloom of the
blue-green alga Microcystis aeruginosa. Med. J. Aust. 1983, 1, 511–514. [CrossRef]
97. Utkilen, H.; Gjolme, N. Iron-stimulated toxin production in Microcystis aeruginosa. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
1995, 61, 797–800. [CrossRef]
98. Facey, J.A.; Apte, S.C.; Mitrovic, S.M. A review of the effect of trace metals on freshwater cyanobacterial
growth and toxin production. Toxins 2019, 11, 643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Harland, F.M.J.; Wood, S.A.; Moltchanova, E.; Williams, W.M.; Gaw, S. Phormidium autumnale growth and
anatoxin-a production under iron and copper stress. Toxins 2013, 5, 2504–2521. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Nunn, P.B.; O’Brien, P.; Pettit, L.D.; Pyburn, S.I. Complexes of zinc, copper and nickel with the non-protein
amino acid L-α-amino-β-methylaminopropionic acid: A naturally occurring neurotoxin. J. Inorg. Biochem.
1989, 37, 175–183. [CrossRef]
101. Humble, A.V.; Gadd, G.M.; Codd, G.A. Binding of copper and zinc to three cyanobacterial microcystins
quantified by differential pulse polarography. Water Res. 1997, 31, 1679–1686. [CrossRef]
102. Rush, T.; Liu, X.; Lobner, D. Synergistic toxicity of the environmental neurotoxins methylmercury and
β-N-methylamino-l-alanine. Neuroreport 2012, 23, 216–219. [CrossRef]
103. Metcalf, J.S.; Bruno, M. Anatoxin-a(S). In Handbook of Cyanobacterial Monitoring and Cyanotoxin Analysis; Wiley:
Chichester, UK, 2017; pp. 155–159.
104. Singh, A.K.; Singh, P.P.; Tripathi, V.; Verma, H.; Singh, S.K.; Srivastarva, M.K.; Kumar, A. Distribution
of cyanobacteria and their interactions with pesticides in paddy field: A comprehensive review.
J. Environ. Manag. 2018, 224, 361–375. [CrossRef]
105. Staley, Z.R.; Harwood, V.J.; Rohr, J.R. A synthesis of the effects of pesticides on microbial persistence in
aquatic ecosystems. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 2015, 45, 813–836. [CrossRef]
106. Bettinetti, R.; Quadroni, S.; Crosa, G.; Harper, D.; Dickie, J.; Kyalo, M.; Mavuti, K.; Galassi, S. A preliminary
evaluation of the DDT contamination of sediments in Lakes Natron and Bogoria (Eastern Rift Valley, Africa).
AMBIO 2011, 40, 341–350. [CrossRef]
107. Woodward, A.R.; Percival, H.F.; Rauschenberger, R.H.; Gross, T.S.; Rice, K.G.; Conrow, R. Abnormal alligators
and organochlorine pesticides in Lake Apopka, Florida. In Wildlife Ecotoxicology Forensics Approached;
Elliott, J.E., Bishop, C.A., Morrissey, C.A., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2011; pp. 153–187.
108. Cerbin, S.; Kraak, M.H.S.; de Voogt, P.; Visser, P.M.; van Donk, E. Combined and single effects of pesticide
carbaryl and toxic Microcystis aeruginosa on the life history of Daphnia pulicaria. Hydrobiologia 2010, 643,
129–138. [CrossRef]
109. Metcalf, J.S.; Beattie, K.A.; Ressler, J.; Gerbersdorf, S.; Pflugmacher, S.; Codd, G.A. Cross-reactivity and
performance assessment of four microcystin immunoassays with detoxication products of the cyanotoxin,
microcystin-LR. J. Water Supply Res. Technol. AQUA 2002, 51, 145–151. [CrossRef]
110. Gill, J.P.K.; Sethi, N.; Mohan, A.; Datta, S.; Girdhar, M. Glyphosate toxicity for animals. Environ. Chem. Lett.
2017. [CrossRef]
111. Zhang, Q.; Qu, Q.; Lu, T.; Ke, M.; Zhu, Y.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, Z.; Du, B.; Pan, X.; Sun, L.; et al. The combined
toxicity effect of nanoplastics and glyphosate on Microcystis aeruginosa growth. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 243,
1106–1112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Wu, L.; Qiu, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Du, Y.; Liu, C.; Ye, J.; Hu, X. Physiological effects of the herbicide glyphosate on the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa. Aquat. Toxicol. 2016, 178, 72–79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Malécot, M.; Guével, B.; Pineau, C.; Holbech, B.F.; Bormans, M.; Wiegand, C. Specific proteome response of
Unio pictorum mussel to a mixture of glyphosate and microcystin-LR. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 5281–5292.
114. Moore, C.J. Synthetic polymers in the marine environment: A rapidly increasing long-term threat. Environ. Res.
2008, 108, 131–139. [CrossRef]
115. Yokota, K.; Waterfield, H.; Hastings, C.; Davidson, E.; Kwietniewski, E.; Wells, B. Finding the missing
piece of the aquatic pollution puzzle: Interaction between primary producers and microplastics.
Limnol. Oceanogr. Lett. 2017, 2, 91–104. [CrossRef]
116. Yao, L.; Hui, L.; Yang, Z.; Chen, X.; Xiao, A. Freshwater microplastics pollution: Detecting and visualizing
emerging trends based on Citespace II. Chemosphere 2020, 245, 125627. [CrossRef]



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

16 of 17

117. Leiser, R.; Wu, G.-M.; Neu, T.R.; Wendt-Potthoff, K. Biofouling, metal sorption and aggregation are related to
sinking of microplastics in a stratified reservoir. Water Res. 2020, 176, 115748. [CrossRef]
118. Feng, L.J.; Sun, X.-D.; Zhu, F.-P.; Feng, Y.; Duan, J.-L.; Xiao, F.; Li, X.-Y.; Shi, Y.; Wang, Q.; Sun, J.-W.;
et al. Nanoplastics promote microcystin synthesis and release from cyanobacterial Microcystis aeruginosa.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020, 54, 3386–3394. [CrossRef]
119. Hyenstrand, P.; Metcalf, J.S.; Beattie, K.A.; Codd, G.A. Losses of the cyanobacterial toxin microcystin-LR
from aqueous solution by adsorption during laboratory manipulations. Toxicon 2001, 39, 589–594. [CrossRef]
120. Hyenstrand, P.; Metcalf, J.S.; Beattie, K.A.; Codd, G.A. Effects of adsorption to plastics and solvent conditions
in the analysis of the cyanobacterial toxin microcystin-LR by high performance liquid chromatography.
Water Res. 2001, 35, 3508–3511. [CrossRef]
121. Hitzfeld, B.C.; Höger, S.; Dietrich, D.R. Cyanobacterial toxins: Removal during water treatment, and human
risk assessment. Environ. Health Perspect. 2000, 108, 113–122. [PubMed]
122. Delgado, L.F.; Charles, P.; Glucina, K.; Morlay, C. The removal of endocrine disrupting compounds,
pharmaceutically activated compounds and cyanobacterial toxins during drinking water preparation using
activated carbon—A review. Sci. Total Environ. 2012, 435–436, 509–525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Hageskal, G.; Lima, N.; Skaar, I. The study of fungi in drinking water. Mycol. Res. 2009, 113, 165–172.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Sanches, S.; Crespo, M.T.B.; Pereira, V.J. Drinking water treatment of priority pesticides using low pressure
UV photolysis and advanced oxidation processes. Water Res. 2010, 44, 1809–1818. [CrossRef]
125. Griffini, O.; Bao, M.L.; Burrini, D.; Santianni, D.; Barbieri, C.; Pantani, F. Removal of pesticides during water
treatment process at Florence water supply, Italy. J. Water Supply Res. Technol. AQUA 1999, 48, 177–185.
[CrossRef]
126. Ignatowicz, K. Selection of sorbent for removing pesticides during water treatment. J. Hazard. Mater. 2009,
169, 953–957. [CrossRef]
127. Ma, B.; Xue, W.; Hu, C.; Liu, H.; Qu, J.; Li, L. Characteristics of microplastic removal via coagulation and
ultrafiltration during drinking water treatment. Chem. Eng. J. 2019, 359, 159–167. [CrossRef]
128. Pivokonsky, M.; Cermakova, L.; Novotna, K.; Peer, P.; Cajthaml, T.; Janda, V. Occurrence of microplastics in
raw and treated drinking water. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 643, 1644–1651. [CrossRef]
129. Elliott, H.A.; Dempsey, B.A.; Maille, P.J. Content and fractionation of heavy metals in water treatment sludges.
J. Environ. Qual. 1990, 19, 330–334. [CrossRef]
130. Chiang, Y.W.; Ghyselbrecht, K.; Santos, R.M.; Martens, J.A.; Swennen, R.; Cappuyns, V.; Meesschaert, B.
Adsorption of multi-heavy metals onto water treatment residuals: Sorption capacities and applications.
Chem. Eng. J. 2012, 200–202, 405–415. [CrossRef]
131. Lambert, T.W.; Holmes, C.F.B.; Hrudey, S.E. Adsorption of microcystin-LR by activated carbon and removal
in full scale water treatment. Water Res. 1996, 30, 1411–1422. [CrossRef]
132. Vlad, S.; Anderson, W.B.; Peldszus, S.; Huck, P.M. Removal of the cyanotoxin anatoxin-a by drinking water
treatment processes: A review. J. Water Health 2014, 12, 601–617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Ho, L.; Tanis-Plant, P.; Kayal, N.; Slyman, N.; Newcombe, G. Optimising water treatment practices for the
removal of Anabaena circinalis and its associated metabolites, geosmin and saxitoxins. J. Water Health 2009, 7,
544–556. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Senogles, P.; Shaw, G.; Smith, M.; Norris, R.; Chiswell, R.; Mueller, J.; Sadler, R.; Eaglesham, G. Degradation
of the cyanobacterial toxin cylindrospermopsin, from Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, by chlorination. Toxicon
2000, 38, 1203–1213. [CrossRef]
135. Falconer, I.R.; Humpage, A.R. Cyanobacterial (blue-green algal) toxins in water supplies:
Cylindrospermopsins. Environ. Toxicol. 2006, 21, 299–304. [CrossRef]
136. Metcalf, J.S.; Codd, G.A. The status and potential of cyanobacteria and their toxins as agents of bioterrorism.
In Handbook on Cyanobacteria: Biochemistry, Biotechnology and Applications; Gault, P.M., Marler, H.J., Eds.;
Nova Science Publishers: New York, NY, USA, 2009; pp. 259–281.
137. Chorus, I.; Bartram, J. Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A Guide to Their Public Health Consequences, Monitoring and
Management; E.&F.N. Spon: London, UK, 1999.
138. World Health Organization. Microplastics in Drinking Water; World Health Organization: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2019.



Toxins 2020, 12, 629

17 of 17

139. World Health Organization. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, 4th ed.; World Health Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
140. Merlo, F.; Maraschi, F.; Piparo, D.; Profumo, A.; Speltini, A. Simultaneous pre-concentration and HPLC-MS/MS
quantification of phycotoxins and cyanotoxins in inland and coastal waters. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
2020, 17, 4782. [CrossRef]
141. Manton, W.I. Total contribution of airborne lead to blood lead. Br. J. Ind. Med. 1985, 42, 168–172. [CrossRef]
142. Querol, X.; Alastuey, A.; Moreno, T.; Viana, M.M.; Castillo, S.; Pey, J.; Rodríguez, S.; Artiñano, B.; Salvador, P.;
Sánchez, M.; et al. Spatial and temportal variation in airborne particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5 ) across
Spain 1999–2005. Atmos. Environ. 2008, 42, 3964–3979. [CrossRef]
143. Metcalf, J.S.; Richer, R.; Cox, P.A.; Codd, G.A. Cyanotoxins in desert environments may present a risk to
human health. Sci. Total Environ. 2012, 421–422, 118–123. [CrossRef]
144. Lentz, D.L.; Hamilton, T.L.; Dunning, N.P.; Scarborough, V.L.; Luxton, T.P.; Vonderheide, A.; Tepe, E.J.;
Perfetta, C.J.; Brunemann, J.; Grazioso, L.; et al. Molecular genetic and geochemical assays reveal severe
contamination of drinking water reservoirs at the ancient Maya city of Tikal. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 10316.
[CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

